TANGGAPAN NG KALIHIM
Maynila

<date>12/26/1969</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 121 s. 1969</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Nursing Schools and Colleges in Government 
Hospitals under the Department of Health</subject>

<body>
The Department of Health believes in adequately prepared nurses for service to the people. Cognizant of the importance for maintaining the safety and welfare of patients committed to its care, the clinical services of designated teaching and training hospitals may be offered for the desired clinical experiences of nursing students provided these rules and regulations are observed and complied with.

I. Responsibilities of the Hospitals:

Hospitals designated by the Secretary of Health where nursing students may affiliate must meet the following requirements:

1. Must be a general hospital with not less than 100 bed capacity duly licensed by the Bureau of Medica Servics as a teaching and training hospital.

2. Must have departmentalized medical, surgical, obstetrical, pediatric and communicable disease services at the in-patient and outpatient units.

3. Special hospitals designated as teaching and training hospitals may be used for special experiences.

4. Shall accept only such number of students for a specified period in proper proportion to the number of patients in each desired clinical area based on the following ratios:

1 student to 4 patients either in the medical, surgical, pediatric, communicable disease or psychiatric service.

5. The assignment of the proper number of students for each service shall be prepared by the nursing affiliation coordinator of the hospital in coordination with the nurse instructor of each respective school. When there are two or more schools affiliating in the hospital, the assignment of an excess number of students in one clinical area at any one time can be prevented by close adherence to the above ratios and proper distribution of students to the three regular working shifts. Rotation within the three shifts may be resorted to when clinical experience is still inadequate after an assignment in one shift, in order to maintain the ratios prescribed herein.

6. For purposes of further coordination and proper distribution of students from various colleges and schools of nursing affiliating at the San Lazaro Hospital, National Orthopedic Hospital and the National Mental Hospital,  and to facilitate proper rotation of students, all yearly applications with the grouping of students for the year must be sent to the Secretary of Health thru the Nursing Consultant. This is presently done so that the Deans or Principals need not go back and forth from one hospital to another to correct schedules when there are too many students at any given time requested. Copies of the rotation of students at the North General Hospital, Pangasinan Provincial Hospital, San Carlos General Hospital, Southern Islands Hospital, Doña Bolivar Memorial Hospital, and Davao General Hospital where more than one school of nursing are affiliating must also be furnished the Secretary of Health thru the Nursing Consultant.

7. Provide adequate nursing personnel as required by the staffing pattern of the Bureau of Medical Services. Have a well organized and administered nursing service.

8. Have a separate nursing training staff responsible for coordinating the affiliation program in the hospital.

9. Have an adequate well-maintained physical plant. Provide necessary equipment and supplies for the care of patients.

10. Provide an intensive care unit.

11. Have a well-equipped central supply room.

13. A suitable dining room space shall be provided for the faculty and students while on clinical experience in the hospital, upon proper arrangement between the school and hospital authorities.

14. Hold regular joint conference with the authorities of the hospital and school for the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

15. Promote cooperation and harmonious working relation through the leadership of the chief nurse, supervising and senior nurses. Periodc dialogues between the nursing service and medical training staff and the nursing education groups be held in order to entertain suggestions and thresh out problems on  the clinical experience program for the benefit of the patients and students.

16. The hospital authorities reserve the right to recommend to the Secretary of Health the discontinuance or withdrawal of affiliation privileges of any school when, in its judgement, the school authorities or their respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation or violated these rules and regulations or the students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the patients.

17. Quarterly reports on the affiliation fees received showing the percentage for each category of the personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Secretary of Health. A narrative report on the status and/or problems of the affiliation program must be submitted to the Secretary of Health.

II. Responsibilities of the affiliating school:

1. All colleges and schools of nursing must be approved by the Board of Examiners for Nurses before applying for the use of the clinical facilities of a general or special teaching and training hospital of the Department of Health. All private colleges and schools of nursing, in addition to having approved by the Board of Examiners for Nurses, must also be approved by the Bureau of Private Schools.

2. Shall meet requirements of the Nursing Law under RA 4704, and Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Board of Examiners for Nurses regarding the school budget, faculty, school facilities, etc.

3. Shall provide qualified clinical instructors to guide, teach, supervise and evaluate students' clinical practice in each service at the hospital at the ratio of one instructor to every twelve students. New clinical instructors must be sent to the hospital for orientation two weeks ahead of the students.

4. Shall send only such students as are in good health at the time of reporting for their clinical practice. Shall fill necessary forms concerning the health and pre affiliation records of the students.

5. Shall send only such number of students in the proper ratio to patients of the desired clinical service as indicated.

6. Shall pay or replace damages, breakages or losses by the faculty and students of hospital property, equipment and supplies.

7. The weekly hour schedule of clinical practice shall be at a minimum of twenty hours but not to exceed a maximum of twenty four hours at an average of four hours a day.

8. All students before beginning their clinical practice, shall have completed satisfactorily the theoretical instruction in each field of service including their pre-requisites at the school.

9. Regular meals with adequate nutrients shall be provided for the faculty and students during their clinical experience.

10. Pay the hospital ₱5.00 for each student for every two-week clinical practice or ₱10.00 for each student per month within the first five days of each month.

11. Shall see to it that the instructors and students observe and abide with the policies, rules and regulations of the hospital and that professional discipline is maintained at all times.

12. The head of the school and faculty concerned shall meet regularly with the chief nurse and the nursing service and medical staffs concerned to jointly plan and thresh out problems with regard to the affiliation program and/or utilization of the clinical services of the hospital.

III. Special provisions:

1. All schools of nursing under the Department of Health affiliating with other teaching and training hospitals of the Department of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees and the signing of the appropriate contract of affiliation.

2. All other government schools or colleges of nursing like the Philippine General Hospital School of Nursing, or Colleges of Nursing of State Universities affiliating with teaching and training hospitals of the Department of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees. They shall, however, be required to sign the appropriate contract of affiliation excluding the item for the payment of affiliation fees.

3. A school or college with a basic nursing program shall not be allowed to affiliate with a government hospital in the Department of Health that operates its own school of nursing as such arrangement would render inadequate the clinical resources of the hospital which are intended to meet the basic learning needs of students of one nursing school.

This administrative order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect on January 1, 1970.
</body>

<sign>AMADEO H. CRUZ, M.D.,C.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>