DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
MANILA

<date>09/25/1970</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 130 s. 1969</docnum>

TO: The Undersecretaries, Bureau Directors, Chiefs of Offices, Regional Health Directors, Chiefs of Training Hospitals and all others concerned.

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementation of the salary adjustment of officials and employees of the National government, and of Republic Act No. 6129, amending the minimum wage law, both effective July 1, 1970.</subject>

<body>
In order to effect the early release of the notices for the 5% salary adjustment and/or minimum wage adustment provided in the lump sum appropriation for Salary Adjustment Fund authorized under item G-2-14-1, pages 1600-1602 of Republic Act No. 6130, of all officials and employees under the Department of Health affected thereby, and pursuant to the provisions of Section 4(c) of Executive Order No. 288, series of 1958, the following delegation of authority is hereby ordered:

1. The "Notice of Adjustment" for officials and employees under the Office (Proper) of the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services, the Bureau of Health Services, the Bureau of Medical Services, the Bureau of Disease Control, the Food and Drug Administrator, shall be signed by the Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services;

2. The "Notice of Adjustment" for officials and employees under the Office (Proper) of the Undersecretary for Special Health Services shall be signed by the Secretary of Health;

3. The "Notice of Adjustment" for the officials and employees of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories, the Bureau of Quarantine and the Bureau of Dental Health Services, shall be signed by the respective Directors of the said bureaus;

4. The "Notice of Adjustment" for the officials and employees of the Office of the Secretary of Health (Proper); those in the various units under the Office of Administrative Services; those under the Office of Health Education and Personnel Training; those under the Disease Intelligence Center; those under Special Health Projects not operating under any Office, Bureau or Regional Health Office, shall be signed by the Chief, Office of Administrative Services;

5. The "Notice of Adjustment" for the officials and employees under the Malaria Eradication Service, shall be signed by the Project Director;

6. The "Notice of Adjustment" for the officials and employees under the Regional Health Offices shall be signed by the Regional Health Director concerned. In the absence of the Regional Director, the Administratve Officer of the Region concerned shall sign the Notice.

7. The "Notice of Adjustment" for officials and employees in the Training Hospitals operating under the immediate supervision and control of the Secretary of Health, shall be signed by the Chief of the Training Hospital concerned.

In authorizing the payment of additional salary adjustment contemplated under the above-mentioned provisions of the Appropriation Act, the provisions of Budget Circular Nos. 212 and 213 dated September 1 and September 7, 1970, respectively, of the Budget Commission, copies of which are hereto attached and made part of this Memorandum, as well as the provisions of the Civil Service Law and the rules promulgated thereunder, shall be strictly observed and complied with.

It is understoor that the basis of computation for the 5% adjustment is the actual salary of the official or employee concerned as of June 30, 1970, and that it is likewise understood that NO adjustment of salary was made effective July 1, 1970 unless the same was affected by the issuance of a regular appointment.

Sufficient copies of the Notice shall be prepared, one copy to be retained by the Office or Agency concerned, one copy to be furnished the Accounting Division, this Department, one copy for the Personnel and Records Division, this Department, one copy for the Budget Commission, one copy for the Civil Service Commission, one copy for the General Auditiong Office and one copy for the Government Service Insurance System.

Sample copies of the "Notice of Adjustment" are hereto attached for ready reference.

This delegated authority shall be effected and good only for the fiscal year 1970-71.
</body>

<sign>AMADEO H. CRUZ, M.D., C.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

IRH/mfr