Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Office of the Secretary
Manila

<date>10/20/1970</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 132 s. 1970</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Regulation Prescribing the Standards of Identity and Quality of Milk and Milk Products (B-4.12-01).</subject>

<body>
1. Milk is the lacteal secretion practically free from colostrum, obtained by the complete milking of one or more healthy cows and contains not less than:
a) 8.25% of milk solids not fat
b) 3.00% of milk fat

The name "Milk" unqualified means cow's milk.

2. Carabao's and/or Buffalo's Milk is the lacteal secretion practically free from colostrum obtained by the complete milking of the healthy carabao and contains not less than
a) 8.5% of milk solids not fat
b) 7.5% of milk fat

3. Goat's (native) Milk is the lacteal secretion practically free from colostrum obtained by the complete milking of the healthy goat and contains not less than
a) 8.5% of milk solids not fat
b) 4.00% of milk fat

4. Pasteurized Milk is milk which has been subjected to a temperature not lower than 63°C (145°F) and holding it continuously at that temperature for not less than 30 minutes, or at least 72°C (161°F) and holding it continuously at that temperature for at least 15 seconds. The milk should be promptly cooled to 10°C (50°F) or lower, Provided, that nothing in this definition shall be construed as barring any other pasteurization process which has been recognized to be equally efficient and which is approved by health authorities.

5. Sterilized Milk is milk that has been heated without concentration or appreciable loss of volume to a temperature of at least 100°C for a length of time to kill all the organisms present and shall be delivered to the consumer in hermetically sealed containers and conforms to that standard and quality of milk as defined.

6. Homogenized Milk is milk which has been treated in such manner as to ensue break-up of the fat globules to such an extent that after 48 hours of quiescent storage at 7°C (45°F), no visible cream separation occurs on the milk and the fat percentage of the top 100 cc. of milk in quart bottle or of proportionate volumes in containers of other sizes, does not differ by more than 10% from the fat percentage of the remaining milk as determined after thorough mixing. 

The word “milk" shall be interpreted to inc1ude homogenized milk.

7. Evaporated milk, Evaporated whole milk, Evaporated full cream milk, Unsweetened condensed whole milk, Unsweetened full cream condensed milk is the liquid product obtained by the partial removal of water from milk and contains not less than
a) 25.8% of total milk solids
b) 7.8% of milk fat

It may contain one or more of the following optional ingredients:
1) Disodium phosphate or sodium citrate or both, or calcium chloride, added in a total quantity of not more than 0.1% by weight of the finished evaporated milk.
2) Carrageenan or salts of carrageenan in a quantity not exceeding .015% of the finished product.
3) Vitamin D in such quantity as to increase the total Vitamin D content to not less than 25 U.S.P. units per 29.57 cc. of the finished evaporated milk.

It may be homogenized. It is sealed in a container and so processed by heat either before or after sealing as to prevent spoilage.

c) When the optional ingredient (2) is added, the label shall bear the statement "_____ added" or "with _____ added" to retard fat separation.

d) When the optional ingredient (3) is present, the label shall bear the statement "with increased Vitamin D or Vitamin D increased" and a quantitative statement of the total Vitamin D content of the finished product.

8. Sweetened Condensed Milk, Sweetened Condensed Whole Milk, Sweetened Full Cream Condensed Milk is the product obtained by the partial removal of water only from milk with the addition of refined sugar (sucrose) or any combination of refined sugar (sucrose) and refined corn sugar (dextrose) to such point that the finished sweetened condensed milk contains not less than
a) 28.0% of total milk solids
b) 8.5% of milk fat
c) The quantity of refined sugar (sucrose) or oombination of such sugar and refined corn sugar (dextrose) is sufficient to prevent spoilage.

9. Whole Milk Powder (Dried Full Cream Milk, Full Cream Milk Powder, Dry Whole Milk, Milk Powder, Dried Milk) is the powder obtained by the removal of water only from milk and contains
a) not less than 95% milk solids
b) not less 26% of milk fat
c) not more than 5% of water, with or without added Vitamin D

10. Skim Milk or Skimmed Milk is milk from which sufficient milkfat has been removed to reduce its milkfat content to less than 0.50% and contains not less than 8.5% of milk solids not fat.

11. Evaporated Skimmed Milk, Unsweetened Condensed Skimmed Milk is the liquid product obtained by partial removal of water only from skimmed milk with the addition of sugar and contains not less than
a) 20% of milk solids

12. Sweetened Condensed Skimmed Milk is the product obtained by partial removal of water only from skimmed milk with the addition of sugar and contains not less than
a) 24% of milk solids

l3. Skimmed Milk Powder (Non-fat Dried Milk, Dried Skimmed Milk) is the powder obtained by the removal of water only from skimmed milk and contains
a) not less than 95% solids
b) not more than 1.5% or fat
c) not more than 5% of water

14. Partly Skimmed Milk Powder (Partly Skimmed Dried Milk) is the powder obtained by the removal of water only from partly skimmed milk and contains
a) not less than 95% milk solids
b) between 1.5% and 26% of milk fat
c) not more than 5% water

15. Reconstituted, Reconstructed or Recombined milk is a product which resu1ts from the recombining of milk constituents with fluid milk or potab1e water, and which complies with the standards for milk fat and solids-not-fat of milk as defined.

l6. Reconstituted, Reconstructed or Recombined Evaporated Milk is a product which results from the recombining of milk constituents with fluid milk or potable water, which complies with the standards for milk fat and solids—not—fat of Evaporated Milk, and which has been reinforced in Vitamin A content to a quantity not less than that normally found in Evaporated Milk. It may consist one or both of the following optional ingredients:
a) Disodium phosphate or sodium citrate or both, or calcium chloride, added in total quantity of not more than 0.1% by weight of the finished product.
b) Vitamin D in such quantity as to increase the total vitamin D content to not less than 7.5 U.S.P. units per 28.35 Gm. of the finished product.

It may be homogenized. It is sealed in a container and so processed by heat either before or after sealing as to prevent spoilage.

16.1 When optional ingredient (b) is present, the label shall bear
l) the statement “With Increased Vitamin D content" or "Vitamin D Content Increased", such statement to immediately precede or follow the name "Recombined Evaporated Milk", without intervening written, printed or graphic matter, wherever such name appears on the label, so conspicuously as to be easily seen under customary conditions of purchase and use.
2) a quantitative statement of the total Vitamin D content of the finished product.

16.2 When the Vitamin A content is reinforced to such extent that the total quantity is more than that normally found in Evaporated Milk, the label shall bear
1) the statement "With increased Vitamin A content" or "Vitamin A Content Increased", such statement to immediately precede or follow the name "Recombined Evaporated Milk", without intervening written, printer or graphic matter, wherever such name appears on the label so conspicuously as to be seen under customary conditions of purchase and use.
2) a quantitative statement of the total Vitamin A content of the finished product.

17. Reconstituted, Reconstructed or Recombined Sweetened Condensed Milk is a product which results from the recombining of milk constituents with fluid milk or potable water with the addition of refined sugar (sucrose) or any combination of refined sugar (sucrose) and refined corn sugar (dextrose) which complies with the standards for milk fat and solids-not-fat of Sweetened Condensed Milk.

18. Reconstituted, Reconstructed or Recombined Skimmed Milk is a product which results from the recombining of skim milk consituents with potable water, and which contains not less than 8.25% milk solids-not-fat.

19. Reconstituted, Reconstructed or Recombined Evaporated Skim Milk is a product which results from the recombining of skim milk constituents with water and which contains not less than 20% milk solids.

20. Flavored Milk is a beverage or confection consisting of milk to which has been added a syrup or flavor made from wholesome ingredients.

21. Flavored Reconstituted Milk is a flavored milk made from reconstituted milk.

22. Flavored Drink or Flavored Dairy Drink is the beverage or confections consisting of skim milk to which has been added a syrup or flavor made from wholesome ingredients.

23. Malted Milk Powder is the product made by combining whole milk with the liquid separated from a mash of ground barley malt and meal, with or without the addition of salt, sodium bicarbonate or potassium bicarbonate in such a manner as to secure full enzyme action of the malt extract and by removing water, and contains
a) not less than 7.5% milk fat
b) not more than 3.5% of moisture

24. Chocolate drink or chocolate-flavored drink generally consists of fluid skim milk or skim milk powder, with or without buttermilk powder, and potable water, to which have been added cocoa powder, sugar, stabilizer such as vegetable gums or other thickening agent, and with or without th addition of flavoring agent such as salt and vanillin.

25. Buttermilk is a fluid product resulting from the manufacture of butter from milk or cream. It contains not less than 8.25% of milk solids-not-fat.

26. Buttermilk Powder (Dried Buttermilk) is the powder obtained by the removal of water only from buttermilk and contains
a) not less than 4.5% butterfat
b) not less than 95% total milk solids
c) not more than 5.0% moisture

27. Butter is a fatty product exclusively derived from milk and contains
a) not less than 80% of milk fat by weight
b) not more than 2% of milk solids not fat by weight
c) not more than 16% of water by weight
d) salt, optional

28. Whey butter is a fatty product derived from whey containing no other fat than mik fat, and contains
a) not less than 80% of milk fat by weight
b) not more than 2% of milk solids-not-fat by weight
c) not more than 16% of water by weight
d) salt, optional

29. Lowfat Milk is milk from which sufficient milk fat has been removed to reduce its milk fat content to not less than 0.50% and not more than 2.00%.

30. Reconstituted, Reconstructed or Recombined Lowfat Milk is a product which results from the recombining of milk constituents with fluid milk or potable water and which contains not less than 0.50% and not more than 2.00% of milk fat.

31. Yoghurt is a coagulated milk product obtained by lactic acid fermentation through the action of Lactobacillus bulgaricus and Streptococcus thermophilis, from cream, concentrated and unconcentrated milk, partly skimmed milk or skimmed milk, with or without the addition of skimmed milk powder, concentrated whey, whey powder cream and sugars.

Flavored yoghurt is yoghurt with added flavoring foods or other flavoring substances and with or without added coloring substances.

Yoghurt and Flavored Yoghurt - 
Minimum milkfat content: 0.5%  by weight, the milkfat content shall be declared on the label.
Minimum milk solids non-fat content: 8.5% by weight
Minimum acidity of the product when sold is 0.7 gram of lactic acid.

32. Toned MIlk is milk prepared by the addition of reconsituted skim milk to locally produced milk in order to reduce its fat content to a predetermined standard while maintaining or increasing the contents of solids-not-fat.

CREAM

1. Cream is the sweet fatty fluid or semi-fluid separated from cow's milk, with or without the addition thereto and intimate admixturee therewith of sweet milk and sweet skim milk and contains not less than 18% of butterfat.

2. Light cream, table cream or coffee cream must contain not less than 18% and not more than 30% butterfat.

3. Whipping Cream is cream which contains not less than 30% milkfat.

4. Light Whipping Cream must contain not less than 30% butterfat and may contain up to 36% butterfat.

5. Heavy Cream or Heavy Whipping Cream is cream which contains not less than 36% milkfat.

6. Half- and Half- is a product consisting of a mixture of milk and cream which contains not less than 10.5% milkfat.

7. Reconstituted, Reconstructed or Recombined Cream is a product which results from the combination of dry cream, butter or milk fat with cream, milk, skim milk, or potable water with or without stabilizer and which complies with milk fat standards of cream.

FILLED MILK

1. Filled milk is the product made by recombining non-fat or skim milk constituents with a mixture of refined coconut oil and corn oil in such manner that the finished product contains not less than 3% of total oil content, not less than 8.5% of non-fat milk solids, not less than 2000 U.S.P. units of Vitamin A and not less than 400 units of Vitamin D per 411 Gms. (The addition of Vitamin D is optional).

2. Evaporated Filled Milk, Unsweetened Condensed Filled Milk is the product made by recombining non-fat or skim milk constituents with a mixture of refined coconut oil and corn oil in such manner that it contains not less than 6% total oil content, not less than 20% non-fat milk solids, not less than 2000 units of Vitamin A and not less than 400 units of Vitamin D per 411 Gms. (The addition of Vitamin D is optional).

It may contain the following optional ingredients:
a) Disodium phosphate or sodium citrate or both or calcium chloride, added in a total quantity of no more than 0.1% by weight of the finished product.
b) Linoleic acid in the total quantity of not more than 4.5% of the coconut oil.

It may be homogenized. It is sealed in a container and so processed by heat as to prevent spoilage. It must contain in its label, in addition to other pertinent labeling requirements, the statements "Prepared from Dry Skim Milk and a Mixture of Refined Coconut Oil and Corn Oil" or "Prepared from Non-fat Milk Solids and a Mixture of Refined Coconut Oil and Corn Oil" or other words to that effect, with such conspicuousness and in such terms as to be read and understood by the ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase and use.

The label shall bear the name "Evaporated Filled Milk" or "Unsweetened Condensed Filled Milk" without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter between these words. The words "Evaporated" and "Unsweetened Condensed" in such name shall appear in types which shall be smaller than those of the words "Filled Milk". The word "Evaporated" or "Unsweetened Condensed" shall not appear in any part of the labels except as above indicated.

3. Sweetened Condensed Filled Milk, Sweetened Evaporated Filled Milk is the product made by recombining non-fat or skim milk constituents with a mixture of refined coconut oil and corn oil in such manner that it contains not less than 7% total oil content, not less than 22% non-fat milk solids, not less than 2000 U.S.P. units of Vitamin A and not less than 400 units Vitamin D per 411 Gms. (Vitamin D is OPTIONAL) and to which resulting product is added a quantity of refined sugar sufficient to prevent spoilage.

It must contain in its label, in addition to other pertinent labeling requirements, the statement "Prepared from Dry Skim Milk and a Mixture of Refined Coconut Oil and Corn Oil" or "Prepared from non-fat Milk Solids and a Mixture of Refined Coconut Oil and Corn Oil", or other words to that effect with such terms as to be read and understood by the ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase and use.

The label shall bear the name "Sweetened Evaporated Filled Milk" without intervening written, printed, or graphic matter between these words. The words "Sweetened Evaporated" or "Sweetened Condensed" shall appear in types which shall be smaller than those of the words "Filled Milk". The word "Evaporated" or "Sweetened Condensed" shall not appear in any part of the label except as above indicated.

It may contain the optional ingredients allowed in Evaporated filled milk.

The word "non-fat milk solids" means the product resulting from fluid skimmed cow's milk from which a considerable portion of the water has been removed.

Filled milk when sold or offered for sale should comply with the following conditions:
1. The name of the product, the common name and the quantity of the reconstituting, fortifying, and/or enriching substances and the approximate analysis of the product are clearly indicated on the label, with such conspicuousness (as compared with other words, statements, designs, or devices, in the labeling) and in such terms as to render it likely to be read and understood by the ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase and use.
2. The reconstituting vegetable fat or oil used is a mixture of coconut oil and corn oil, which in every case should be derived locally and not imported. Such mixture shall contain not less than 10% corn oil. The common names of the reconstituting substances (coconut oil and corn oil) shall appear in the statement of approximate analysis of the product.
3. The use of a proprietary name in place of “Filled Milk” may be allowed but such product shall be subject to the usual label requirements as well as those indicated therein. If the name Filled Milk is used, there must be no intervening written, printed or graphic matter between the words “Filled” and “Milk”.

The above provisions do not exempt filled milk from other pertinent labeling requirements.

This regulation shall take effect thirty (30) days after publication in the Official Gazette.
</body>

<sign>AMADEO H. CRUZ, M.D., C.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>