<date>06/03/1971</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 162, s. 1971</docnum>

TO: Chiefs of Agencies, Training Hospitals, Regional Training Centers and Regional Training Laboratories.

<subject>SUBJECT: Amending Administrative Orders No. 87, s. 1968, No. 103 and No. 110, both series of 1969, and No. 133, s. 1970, on guidelines for the implementation of student affiliation with government training hospitals, regional training centers, regional training laboratories and other agencies of the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
Section 29 of the Special Provisions under the Department of Health Republic Act No. 6050 provides:

"Section 29 - Physicians, nurses, medical technologists and other staff members of government hospitals, who participate in the training of students of private medical, nursing and medical technology schools are hereby authorized to receive compensation at rates to be fixed by the Secretary of Health upon recommendation of the chiefs of hospitals and/or heads of agencies concerned, the compensation to be payable from funds contributed by the said schools for the purpose not to exceed 70% of the total collection, including the purchase of equipment, supplies and materials not to exceed 25% thereof; and the remaining 5% to constitute the reserve fund. The affiliated schools, colleges, and universities are required to pay training fees of thirty pesos (₱30.00) for medical interns, twenty pesos (₱20.00) for medical technologists, and medical clerks and ten pesos (₱10.00) for nursing interns. All bills incurred in connection with this training shall be rendered directly against the affiliated educational institutions by the chiefs, and/or head of agencies."

In conformity with the above provisions, the following guidelines for the implementation of student affiliation with government hospitals, training hospitals, regional training centers, regional training laboratories and other agencies of the Department of Health are hereby prescribed:

I. APPORTIONMENT OF FEES

The total affiliation fees to be collected from medical, nursing, midwifery and medical technology student affiliates assigned in government hospitals, training hospitals, regional training centers, regional training laboratories and other agencies of the Department of Health shall be distributed as follows:

1. 70% for honorarium
2. 25% for purchase of equipment, supplies and materials
3. 5% for a reserve fund

The amount of affiliation fees varies from agency to agency according to the number of student affiliates and number of student categories (medical, medical technology, nursing and midwifery). Likewise, the number of training staff for each category of student affiliates also varies from agency to agency. The total honorarium, therefore, that would accrue to the chief of the training hospital, Regional training centers, regional training laboratories and other agencies and to each of the training staff, administrative and other personnel participating in the training will also vary from agency to agency. Therefore, in order to establish a fair and equitable policy of distribution, the 70% for honorarium shall be apportioned among the chief of the training hospitals, Regional training centers, Regional training laboratories or other agency, training staff, administrative and other personnel participating in the training as follows:

For Agencies with four (4) Categories of Student Affiliates
6% for the Chief of the training hospital, Regional training center, Regional training laboratory or other agency
4% for administrative staff

For Agencies with three (3) Categories of Student Affiliates
8% for the Chief of the training hospital, Regional training center, Regional training laboratory or other agency
6% for administrative staff

For Agencies with two (2) Categories of Student Affiliates
10% for the Chief of the training hospital, Regional training center, Regional training laboratory or other agency
8% for administrative staff

For Agencies with only one (1) Category of Student Affiliates
12% for the Chief of the training hospital, Regional training center, Regional training laboratory or other agency
10% for administrative staff

The remaining 90%, 86%, 82%, and 78%, respectively, of the allocation for honorarium should be apportioned among the training staff and the various government training hospitals, regional training centers, regional training laboratories, provincial and city health offices and other field offices utilized as field training units, the apportionment to be based on rank, degree of responsibility and amount of training activity performed. The apportionment should be made by the chief of the training hospital, regional training center, regional training laboratory or other agency in the form of a payroll reflecting the apportionment of honorarium both in percentage and in pesos and centavos must be agreed upon by the training staff and other personnel participating in the training and submitted to the Secretary of Health for approval through the Budget and Finance Office, Department of Health.

In no case shall the chief of a hospital, Regional training center, Regional training laboratory receive more than ₱500.00 as monthly honorarium.

The 5% reserve fund may be used for reimbursable expenses not to exceed ₱300.00 a month for each member in connection with the performance of the functions of the Accreditation Committee. For this purpose, the funds corresponding to the 5% reserves now in the possession of the different hospitals, laboratories, training centers and other agencies participating in student affiliation shall be turned over the Cashier of the Department of Health who shall take custody and make disbursements of the said funds.

II. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HOSPITALS AND SCHOOLS

Chiefs of hospitals, Regional training centers, and Regional training laboratories and heads of other agencies or their authorized representatives shall meet from time to time with the deans or whoever is in-charge of the training in the private medical, nursing, midwifery, and medical technology schools to thresh out problems that may arise relative to the training program.

III. MAINTENANCE OF STANDARD OF TRAINING

Only government hospitals, regional training centers, regional training laboratories and other agencies designated by the Department of Health as training hospitals and agencies are authorized to accept for affiliation students from private medical, nursing, medical technology and midwifery schools. For this purpose, an accrediting committee on training is to be created by the Secretary of Health and to be composed of representatives from the Bureau of Medical Services, the Bureau of Research and Laboratories, Regional Health Offices and the Office of Health Education and Personnel Training. This Committee is charged with the responsibility of inspection, evaluation and approval of training hospitals or agencies in accordance with minimum requirements in order to assure the maintenance of adequate training standards.

IV. BILLING OF AFFILIATION FEES

The Chiefs of the training hospital, Regional training center, Regional training laboratory, or agency shall require that a complete list of trainees be submitted by the head of affiliated schools at the start of the training, which shall be the basis for preparation of bills against the affiliated educational institutions in accordance with the rates prescribed under Section 28 of the Special Provisions under the Department of Health of Republic Act No. 5432.

V. BUDGETING

The Chief of the hospital, Regional training center, Regional training laboratory or agency shall submit a special budget for the purpose pursuant to the provisions of Commonwealth Act No. 246.

VI. COLLECTION AND DISBURSEMENT OF AFFILIATION FUNDS

The collection and disbursement of affiliation fees as government fund shall be made in accordance with existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations. It is, therefore, understood, among other things, that all collections shall be acknowledged by official receipts and all disbursements shall be evidenced by the necessary documents.

In the case of training hospitals, regional training centers, regional training laboratories or agencies who do not maintain a treasury account or current account, the collections shall be deposited under a separate account with the authorized depository bank in the locality where the training hospital or agency is situated.

VII. ACCOUNTING FOR THE AFFILIATION FUNDS

A separate set of books of accounts shall be kept for the purpose. All exisiting accounting and auditing rules and regulations on government funds shall be followed, particularly, but not exclusively, pertinent procedures prescribed under Budget Circular No. 196, dated October 20, 1967 and GAO General Circulars Nos. 38 and 40.

VIII. REPORTING

It shall be the responsibility of the chief of hospital, regional training center, regional laboratory or head of agency to submit the following monthly reports on the training program to the Secretary of Health throught the Office of Health Education and Personnel Training on the 10th of the month following the period covered by the reports:

a. The number of students for each discipline from the different schools.
b. Report of income.
c. Statement of obligations and outstanding obligations.
d. Report of equipment purchased.

IX. OTHERS

The Chief of the training hospital, regional training center, regional laboratory or other agency shall prescribe the standard operating procedure to be followed in the control and disposition of the affiliation funds pursuant to the foregoing general outline of procedures and the existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

X. REPEALING CLAUSE

Administrative Orders No. 87, series of 1968, No. 103 and N. 110, boith series of 1969, and No. 133, series of 1970, and all other Orders incosistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed.

XI. EFFECTIVITY

This Administrative Order is made effective as of July 1, 1971.
</body>

<sign>AMADEO H. CRUZ, M.D., C.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>