Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Office of the Secretary
Manila

<date>08/06/1971</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 150 s. 1971</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Regulation Part D-4 COSMETIC: Registration of Cosmetic Specialties.</subject>

<body>
D - 4.0 Republic Act 372, otherwise known as Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, states among other things that the policy of the State is to insure safe and good quality supply of cosmetic and to regulate the production, sale and traffic of same to protect the health of the people. For the proper implementation of the above policy, and under authority of Sec. 26(a) of R.A. 3720, the following rules and regulations governing the registration and sale of cosmetic specialties is promulgated in order to insure the quality and safety of the cosmetic supply in the country.

D - 4.1 A cosmetic specialty shall be distributed and sold only after having been officially registered with the Food and Drug Administration.

D - 4.2 A cosmetic specialty is an article within the meaning of Sec. 10(h) of R.A. 3720.

D - 4.33 No cosmetic specialty shall be accepted for registration from any applicant unless such applicant is a holder of a current permit issued by the Food and Drug Administration to engage in the manufacture, importation, sale or distribution of such cosmetic specialty.

D - 4.4 
a). Application for registration of locally manufactured cosmetic specialty shall be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration by the manufacturer of his duly authorized representative.

b). Application for registration of a foreign manufactured cosmetic specialty shall be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration by the importer or his duly authorized representative.

c). Where a cosmetic specialty is not manufactured by the business firm or person appearing on the label, the application for registration of said specialty shall be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration by the local manufacturer.

D - 4.5 The application for registration of a cosmetic specialty shall be accompanied by the following requirements:

a). Application letter from the manufacturer, importer or distributor.

b). Full list and amount of all the ingredients used as component of the finished specialty.

c). Technical specification or description of all the ingredients used as component of the product.

d). Technical specifications of the finished specialty.

e). Analytical method of all the active ingredients or medicaments, if any, in the finished specialty.

f). Two unattached labels or specimens of the proposed label and other labeling material, if any, to be used with the specialty.

g). Two market or commercial presentations of the specialty.

D - 4.6 Where a cosmetic specialty is to be distributed or sold in several forms of presentation (e.g. pomade and aerosol type) but under one designation or commercial name only, separate registration with respect to each form shall be made.

D - 4.7 Where the application for registration satisfies the requirements stated in Sec. 4.5 of this regulation, the Food and Drug Administration shall enter the cosmetic specialty in the official registry, and shall inform the applicant of the registration number.

D - 4.8 Where the application for registration does not meet the requirements of Sec. 4.5 of this regulation, the Food and Drug Administration shall give the applicant sixty (60) days from the date of submission of the application within which to remedy the deficiency. If no remedy is made within the allowed period of time, the application for registration shall be deemed disapproved.

D - 4.9 In case of change in the particulars submitted pursuant to Sec. 4.5 of this regulation, the holder of the registration number shall notify the Food and Drug Administration in writing regarding such change, provided such change is not in violation of any section of this regulation.

D - 4.10 The initial registration fee for a cosmetic specialty

a). without any active ingredient shall be fifty (₱50.00) pesos

b). with active ingredient or medicament shall be one hundred (₱100.00) pesos

D - 4.11 The initial registration of a cosmetic specialty shall have a validity period of two (2) years from the date of release. Subsequent renewal of registration for a five (5) year period of validity shall be charged a fee of fifty (₱50.00) pesos. If renewed annually, a fee of twenty (₱20.00) pesos shall be charged.

D - 4.12 The registration of a cosmetic specialty shall be considered not effective or cancelled if:

a). The holder of the registration number so requests; or

b). The holder of the registration number failed to renew the registration of such cosmetic specialty pursuant to Sec. 4.11 of this regulation; or

c). The holder of the registration number advertised or promoted the cosmetic specialty not in accordance with the particular submitted pursuant to Sec. 4.5 of this regulation; or

d). New development, findings or public interest and protection may so warranrt such cancellation; or

e). The composition or labeling of the cosmetic specialty has been modified without prior authorization of the Food and Drug Administration; or

f). The cosmetic specialty is manufactured, packed or distributed by a firm or person who is not a holder of a current permit issued by the Food and Drug Administration to engage in the manufacture and sale of cosmetic specialty; or

g). The permit issued by the Food and Drug Administration has been revoked.

D - 4.13 All approved registrations prior to January 1972 shall be subject to renewal in accordance with these regulations.

D - 4.14 Any representation that creates an impression of official endorsement because of regisration will be considered misbranded within the meaning of Sec. 24(a) of Republic Act 3720.

D - 4.15 This regulation shall take effect sixty days after publication in the Official Gazette.
</body>

<sign>AMADEO H. CRUZ, M.D., C.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>