Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>07/02/1973</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 188-A s. 1973</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT : Authority and Functions of the National Cancer Control Center of the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
In order to effectively reduce the incidence, morbidity and mortality from cancer in the Philippines, the National Cancer Control Center of the Department of Health under the leadership of Dr. Tranquilino Elicaño, shall undertake the following functions and responsibilities:

1. To study and evaluate the cancer problem in the Philippines and formulate effective nationwide policies to solve this problem.

2. To assume leadership and serve as the nucleus and coordinating body for all cancer work in the Department of Health.

3. To establish and guide the effective operation of satellite cancer centers attached to strategically located medical centers or the eleven (11) regional hospitals throughout the Philippines.

These regional cancer centers aside from giving cancer control service will in turn serve as coordinating bodies for cancer work in provincial hospitals and other smaller Department of Health agencies all the way down to the barangay level.

4. To plan, establish and carry out an effective nationwide program of cancer prevention, detection, diagnosis, pre-treatment evaluation, treatment, rehabilitation and continuing care.

a. To establish and supervise the operation of Tumor Boards in regional and training hospitals throughout the Philippines.

b. To advise on the upgrading of existing cancer management facilities in Department of Health agencies throughout the Philippines, or in instances where there are no facilities available, to advise and help in the selection of modern facilities.

c. To establish rapport and coordinate with other agencies both government and private, local and international, who are in one way or another doing work in cancer and related fields. One project for early cancer detectioIn which may be feasibly started on a small scale and then expanded on a nationwide basis is the tie—up with the Family Planning Program by taking pap smears of all women utilizing the services of the thousands of Family Planning Clinics throughout the Philippines thereby serving as a mass screening procedure for early detection of cervical cancer.  

d. The relation of cigarette smoking and cancer can be stressed as one of the nationwide programs of cancer prevention. A study of the tar and nicotine content of local cigarettes should be dine and the results evaluated and made known to the public for their protection.

5. To establish and carry out an effective training program in the various specialized fields of Oncology for medical and paramedical personnel not only from the greater Manila area but most specially those coming from regional centers, provincial hospitals, rural health units and other Department of Health agencies in the rural areas.

6. To establish and regularly carry out, by coordinating with the Department of Public Information and the National Mass Media Production Center, an effecive program of Nationwide Cancer Education for the public aimed at emphasizing that most cancers can be cured provided that the public take note of the early warning signs and signals of this disease because the best chances of cure is through early detection and correct diagnosis and the giving of proper treatment promptly.

7. To be responsible for cancer epidemiology in the Philippines and to collect data and statistics in order to establish a reliable cancer registry of nationwide scope which is essential to better understanding of cancer as a disease and to improve care and treatment of cancer patience.

8. To provide excellent serv1ces and job opportunities in modern cancer centers throughout the country for the numerous medical and paramedical personnel who graduate every year and most specially for cancer experts who return to the Philippines after extensive training abroad.

9. To encourage research on malignancies which are prevalent in the Philippines and research into the possibility of finding raw materials in the Philippines which can be compounded locally into useful drugs in order to lower the prohibitive price of chemotherapeutic agents to fit the pocketbook of low—income patients.

10. To set up a building at the corner of Rizal Avenue and Quiricada streets in order to adequately house the central activities of the National Cancer Control Center. This building shall contain the most modern equipment for clinical serv1ce, cancer training, epidemiology and research.

This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>