Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>10/14/1975</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 261 s. 1975</docnum>

TO: The Regional Health Directors, Chief of Agencies, and Training and Teaching Hospitals

<subject>SUBJECT: Amending Administrative Order No. 121 s. 1969 on Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Nursing Schools and Colleges in Government Hospitals under the Department of Health</subject>

<body>
In line with the directives of President Ferdinand E. Marcos to encourage the training and production of more nurses to meet the needs of our country and abroad and to improve the quality of Filipino nurses and upgrade nursing education, the Department of Health, cognizant of its role in the preparation of nurse practitioners in the Philippines, hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with in the affiliation of student nurses in the Department of Health Teaching and Training Hospitals.

I. Responsibilities of the Department of Health Hospitals

Training and Teaching hospitals designated by the Secretary of Health where nursing students may affiliate to obtain the desired clinical experience must meet the following requirements:

1. Must be a general or special hospital with not less than 100 bed capacity and an average bed occupancy of not less than 80%.

a. General hospitals must have departmentalized medical, surgical, obstetrical and pediatric services for in-patients and out-patients. If possible, general hospitals should also try to set up communicable disease services.

b. Special hospitals such as the National Mental Hospital, National Orthopedic Hospital and San Lazaro Hospital may be utilized for the training of nursing affiliates along these specialized nursing services.

2. a. General hospitals shall strictly follow the ratio of one (1) student nurse affiliate for every two (2) patients per shift computed according to the actual percentage of bed occupancy of the hospital.

b. The exact ratio of student nurse affiliates to patients in special hospitals such as the National Mental Hospital, National Orthopedic Hospital and San Lazaro Hospital will be determined after further detailed study of the situation by the Directors, Chief Nurses and Nursing Principals of these hospitals with the Affiliation Committee of the Department of Health for effective solutions to problems in their respective hospitals.

3. Shall allow student nurse affiliation only in the morning and afternoon shifts. No student nurse shall be allowed to affiliate during the night shift except in the operating room, delivery room and nursery with their corresponding clinical instructors.

4. Shall strictly require affiliating private colleges and schools of nursing to assign one (1) clinical instructor coming from their school or college to proctor every twelve (12) student nurse affiliates per shift. In the case of nursing affiliates in their senior year, the ratio enforced shall be one (1) clinical instructor for every fourteen (14) students.

5. Must have a well organized and administered nursing service with qualified and adequate nursing personnel.

6. Must have a nursing training staff responsible for the training educational program of the nursing personnel of the hospital including the orientation of new clinical instructors of the affiliating nursing schools.

7. Must have an adequate, well-maintained physical plant with the provision of necessary equipment and supplies including the provision of:

a. An intensive care unit or its equivalent
b. A well-equipped central supply service
c. A well-equipped ward conference room
d. Library
e. Nursing training office

8. A suitable dining space shall be provided for the faculty and students while on clinical experience in the hospital upon proper arrangement between the school and the hospital authorities.

Hospital authorities reserve the right and have the duty to recommend to the Secretary of Health thru the Affiliation Committee the suspension or cancellation of affiliation privileges of any school when the school authorities and/or their respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation; and/or have violated the rules and regulations set; and/or the affiliating students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the patients.

Department of Health hospitals should strictly enforce the rules and regulations set by this Administrative Order in accepting new nursing schools and colleges for affiliation and in renewing existing contracts with affiliating schools and colleges of nursing for the next school year.

Any hospital that operates its own school of nursing should not allow any affiliation from private schools and colleges except when its school of nursing does not have the sufficient number of students to adequately fulfill the ratio of one (1) student nurse per two (2) patients per shift computed on the actual percentage of bed occupancy of the hospital.

Quarterly reports on the affiliation fees received showing the percentages of each category of personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Secretary of Health thru the Affiliation Committee together with the narrative report on the status and/or problems of the affiliation program.

II. Responsibilities of the Affiliating Schools/Colleges of Nursing:

1. All schools/colleges of nursing must have met the following requirements before applying for the use of clinical facilities of a general or a special Training/Teaching hospital of the Department of Health

a. Approval from the Department of Education and Culture and the Board of Nursing
b. Compliance with the provisions of the Nursing Law R.A. 4704
c. Compliance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Nursing regarding budget, faculty, school facilities, etc.

2. Shall provide qualified clinical instructors to guide, teach, supervise and evaluate studets' clinical experience in the training/teaching hospital in accordance with the ratio of one (1) clinical instructor per twelve (12) students in the lower years and fourteen (14) students in their senior year. No student shall be sent to the clinical area without the clinical instructor from the affiliating school or college. This includes student nurses affiliating during the night shift in the operating room, delivery room and nursery.

3. Shall pay or replace damages, breakages or losses by the faculty and students of hospital property, equipment and supplies.

4. Shall enforce that the clinical practice of each student be set at a minimum of 20 hours per week.

5. Shall see to it that all nursing students before beginning their clinical practice in a particular clinical area must have either satisfactorily completed the theoretical aspect of that clinical area or should at least be concurrently taking up the theoretical aspect of that particular area.

6. Shall pay the hospital ten pesos (₱10.00) for each student for every two-week clinical experience or twenty pesos (₱20.00) for each student per month. Payment is due within the first five days of each month.

7. Shall make a request for new affiliation to the chief of Hospital accomplishing the appropriate standard form of the contract of affiliation (5 copies) and course thru proper channels to the Secretary of Health through the Chairman, Accredidation Committee on Training and Student Affiliation. Contracts shall be subject for renewal every year.

8. Shall see to it that the instructors and students observe and abide with the policies, rules and regulations of the hospital and that professional discipline is maintained at all times.

III. Joint Responsibilities of Affiliating Schools and Colleges of Nursing and the Training and Teaching Hospitals

1. The Clinical Program of nursing students shall be the joint responsibility of the Nursing Training Staff of the hospital and the Nurse Instructor of each respective school. Assignments and proper rotation of students for each clinical area shall be prepared in accordance with the rotation mentioned herein. When there are two or more schools affiliating in a hospital, the assignment of students in a clinical area may be on a two-shift basis.

2. Holding of joint conferences with the authorities of the hospital and the school for the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

3. Promotion of cooperation and harmonious working relations among the teaching/training personnel and school personnel. Periodic dialogue between the Nursing Service, Training Staff and the Nursing Schools should be held in order to entertain suggestions and thresh out problems in relation with the clinical experience program for the benefit of the patients and the students.

IV. Special Provisions

1. All schools of Nursing under the Department of Health affiliating with other teaching and training hospitals of the Department of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees and the signing of the appropriate Contract of Affiliation.

2. All other government schools or colleges of nursing like the Philippine General Hospital School of Nursing or Colleges of Nursing of State Universities affiliating with the teaching and training hospitlas of the Department of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees. They shall however, be required to sign the appropriate Contract of Affiliation.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>