Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>06/14/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 286 s. 1976</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Delegation of Authority to Chiefs of Special Hospitals, Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Hospital and Quirino Memorial General Hospital to Approve Financial Transactions.</subject>

<body>
This Order is issued to authorize officials of the Special Hospitals, Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Hospital and Quirino Memorial General Hospital to approve disbursements, requisitions and other transactions in connection with the performance of their final responsibilities, in accordance with Part II, Chapter I, Article II-3-c of the Integrated Reorganization Plan as implemented by Letter of Implementation No. 8, dated November 1, 1972.

I. Approval of Disbursements

1. Officials authorized to approve disbursements and sign treasury warrants and requests for obligation of allotments:

a. Chief of Hospital - no limit
b. Administrative Officer - up to ₱1,000.00

II. Signing of Checks

1. Officials authorized to sign checks:

a. Cashier - Checks up to ₱500.00
b. Administrative Officer - Checks above ₱500.00 up to ₱5,000.00
c. Chief of Hospital - Checks above ₱5,000.00

2. Officials authorized to countersign checks:

a. Chief of Hospital - Checks above ₱500.00 up to ₱5,000.00
b. Administrative Officer - Checks up to ₱500.00

III. Approval of Requisitions and Other Fiscal Actions

The hospital head shall:

1. Approve requisitions as follows:

a. Requisition thru DOPS contracts (BSC Form No. 1-A) not to exceed ₱10,000.00 per requisition;
b. Purchase Orders covering:

(1) Emergency purchases of supplies and materials not to exceed ₱10,000.00 per requisition;
(2) Emergency repairs of motor vehicles and equipment not to exceed ₱10,000.00 per order if the repair is to be performed by the exclusive distributor of the particular equipment and to the advantage of the government, and not to exceed ₱5,000.00 per order if the repair services can be readily rendered by several work shops or private contractors.

c. Limitations

As a general rule, emergency purchases are to be discouraged.

a. Splitting of requisitions in order to avoid review by higher officials is prohibited. Requisitions must be based on the approved procurement program and itemized in accordance with the commodity groupings prepared by the Bureau of Supply Coordination.

IV. Responsibility of Approving Officials

Approving officials shall be accountable for the following:

1. Proper utilization of funds including:

a. The incurrence of expenditures not to exceed authorized allotments;
b. The provision of adequate funds to finance all the activities of the hospital.

2. Proper interpretation of related existing fiscal policies, rules, regulatons and observance of prescribed procedures; and

3. Accomplishment of results in accordance with approved financial and work programs.

V. Limitations of Authority

The actions of the approving officials are limited to transactions chargeable to the funds or allotments of their respective offices.

VI. Approval of Transactions by the Department Head

All financial transactions that exceeds the authority delegated to the officials designated in this Order shall require prior approval of the Department Head.

VII. Rescinding Provisions

Any or all orders or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are rescinded.

VIII. Filing Bond

The duly designated approving officials shall file bond with the Bureau of Treasury as accountable officers in accordance with existing regulations.

IX. Amendments

Any or all actions or recommendations to amend or modify the provision of this Order shall be initiated by the Chief of the Financial and Management Service.

X. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect as of the date of its issuance.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>