REPUBLIKA NG PILIPINAS
KAGAWARAN NG KALUSUGAN
TANGGAPAN NG KALIHIM
MAYNILA

<date>10/05/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 302 s. 1976</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Directive to all Regional Health Directors, Provincial Health Officers, City Health Officers, Chiefs of Hospitals, and Rural Health Physicians for the purpose of strengthening Malaria Passive Case Detection.</subject>

<body>
For the purpose of strengthening the Malaria Eradication Program and to insure that this objective is achieved, the participation of all agencies under this Department in the passive case detection operation is hereby enjoined, as specified hereunder:

l. The Regional Health Directors, Provincial Health Officers, City Health Officers, and Rural Health Physicians are hereby designated as representatives of the undersigned in the supervision of the Malaria Eradication Service personnel working within the jurisdiction of their respective offices and directed to support the passive case detection activities of the Malaria Eradication Program.

2. The Chief Malariologists shall, in addition to their regular supervisory duties, act as Regional Malaria Advisers and Consultants to the Regional Health Directors on matters pertaining to the passive case detection and the coordination of the malaria eradication activities with the general public health service.

3. The Malaria Unit Chiefs shall, in addition to their regular duties, act as consultants to the Provincial Health Officer or the City Health Officer on matters pertaining to the passive case detection activities of the Malaria Eradication Program.

4. All Government Hospitals, City Health Offices, and Rural Health Units are hereby designated as Passive Case Detection (PCD) posts for purposes of malaria case detection which shall be carried out as follows:

a. The personnel of City Health Offices and Rural Health Units (CHO, RHP, Nurses, Midwives, Rural Sanitation Inspectors), in addition to their regular duties, are charged with the detection and treatment of malaria cases by:

(1) the taking of blood films from all fever cases and those with history of fever for the previous four weeks and its proper identification as per MES procedures, wherever and whenever contacting such cases;

(2) the administration of presumptive treatment following MES schedules to all fever cases from which blood films were collected;

(3) submission of collected blood films together with the accompanying form duly filled up by the PCD posts for collection by MES field personnel.

(4) the administration of radical treatment following MES schedules to all laboratory confirmed malaria cases.

b. The Chiefs of Hospitals shall see to it that:

(1) blood films are taken and properly identified as per MES procedures from malarious and non—malarious areas for detection of the disease, and presumptive treatment following MES schedules is administered to all persons from which blood films are collected;

(2) blood films which cannot be examined in the hospital be wrapped with the respective blood collection form duly filled up for collection by MES field personnel;

(3) a list of malaria patients detected in the hospital be prepared monthly for collection by MES field personnel;

(4) all positive blood films and 10% of the negative films examined in the hospital shall be wrapped for collection by MES field personnel for submission to the Verification Laboratory of the MES;

(5) all laboratory confirmed malaria cases are given radical treatment following MES schedules.

c. Health education and malaria information dissemination shall be undertaken by all PCD posts and adapted to the particular needs of the successive stages of the operations. Under the present stage of the program, the following malaria information shall be disseminated:

(1) How malaria is contracted.
(2) Why houses are sprayed with DDT.
(3) Why the sprayed surfaces with DDT should not be wiped off.
(4) Why a blood film should be taken from every fever case.
(5) Why every confirmed case should receive radical treatment.

5. The Malaria Eradication Service shall undertake the following:

a. Provide logistical support especially glass slides, anti-malaria drugs, forms, etc., to all PCD posts until such time when the General Health Services and Hospitals shall have been provided thereof.

b. Ensure speedy collection and examination of all blood films taken by the PCD posts.

c. Furnish the PCD posts of the results of blood examinations at the earliest possible time.

6. City Health Officers, Chiefs of Hospitals, and Rural Health Physicians shall see that the herein directive is complied by all their nurses, midwives, and Rural Sanitation Inspectors with regard to taking of blood films and giving presumptive treatment to fever cases and radical treatment to microscopically confirmed malaria cases.

7. The Malaria Unit Chief shall render a monthly report to the Provincial Health Officer(s) on the productivity of PCD posts. A Progress chart shall be displayed in the Unit Headquarters and the Office of the Provincial Health Officer showing the monthly total of blood films collected and examined by each RHU or PCD post and the positive cases.

This directive shall take effect immediately.

All previous Orders, Memoranda and Circulars issued to the contrary are hereby superseded.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 

NOTE:
The Regional Health Director is requested to furnish all concerned under his region copies of this Administrative Order.