Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>10/04/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 300 s. 1976</docnum>

TO: Regional Health Directors, Acting Regional Health Directors and Officers-in-Charge of Regional Health Offices, duly designated by the Secretary of Health.

<subject>SUBJECT: Delegation of authority governing administrative complaints against employees of the region pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 448 dated August 18, 1976.</subject>

<body>
SEC. 1. Pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 448 dated August 18, 1976, strengthening the administrative capacity for regional operations, and in line with the government policy of decentralization as embodied in the Integrated Reorganization Plan (IRP) in relation to par. (e) Section 37 of P.D. 807, the Regional Health Directors, Acting Regional Health Directors and Officers-in-Charge of Regional Health Offices duly designated by the Secretary of Health are hereby delegated the authority to investigate administrative complaints against employees of the region and to submit appropriate recommendations to this Department. For this purpose, the guidelines enumerated hereunder shall be observed and followed:

Delegation of Authority -

A. Specific Authority - To investigate administrative complaints against employees of the region and submit appropriate recommendations to the Secretary of Health.

B. Complaints - Except when initiated by the Secretary of Health or by the Regional Director, no complaint against Civil Service officials or employees of the Region shall be given due course unless the same is in writing and subscribed and sworn to by the complainant.

C. Grounds for Disciplinary action:

(1) Dishonesty;
(2) Oppression;
(3) Neglect of duty;
(4) Misconduct;
(5) Disgraceful and immoral conduct;
(6) Being notoriously undesirable;
(7) Discourtesy in the course of official duties;
(8) Inefficiency and incompetence in the performance of official duties;
(9) Receiving for personal use of a fee, gift or other valuable thing given by any person in the hope or expectation of receiving a favor or better treatment than that accorded other persons or committing acts punishable under the anti-graft laws;
(10) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
(11) Improper or unauthorized solicitation of contributions from subordinate employees and by teachers and school officials from school children;
(12) Violation of existing Civil Service Law and rules or reasonable office regulations;
(13) Falsification of official document;
(14) Frequent unauthorized absences or tardiness in reporting for duty, loafing or frequent unauthorized absences from duty during regular office hours;
(15) Habitual drunkenness;
(16) Gambling prohibited by law;
(17) Refusal to perform official duty or render overtime services;
(18) Disgraceful, immoral or dishonest conduct prior to entering the service;
(19) Physical or mental incapacity or disability due to immoral or vicious habits;
(20) Borrowing money by superior officers from subordinates or lending by subordinates to superior offices;
(21) Lending money at usurious rates of interest;
(22) Willful failure to pay just debts or willful failure to pay taxes due to the government;
(23) Contracting loans of money or other property from persons with whom the office of the employee concerned has business relations;
(24) Pursuit of private business, vocation or profession without the permission required by Civil Service rules and regulations;
(25) Insubordination;
(26) Engaging directly or indirectly in partisan political activities by one holding non-political office;
(27) Conduct prejudicial to the best interest of the service;
(28) Lobbying for personal interest or gain in legislative halls and offices without authority;
(29) Promoting the sale of tickets in behalf of private enterprises that are not intended for charitable or public welfare purposes and even in the latter cases if there is no prior authority;
(30) Nepotism as defined in Section 49 of this Decree (Sec. 36 (b) P.D. 807).

D. Procedure in Administrative Investigation Against Civil Service employees of the Region:

1. Administrative Proceedings may be commenced against a subordinate officer or employee by the regional director or any competent authority, or upon sworn, written complaint of any other person.

2. In the case of a complaint filed by any other person, the complainant shall submit sworn statements covering his testimony and those of his witnesses together with his documentary evidence. If on the basis of such papers a prima facie case exists, the Regional Director shall notify the respondent in writing, of the charges against the latter, to which shall be attached copies of the complaint, sworn statements and other documents submitted, and the respondent shall be allowed not less than seventy-two hours after receipt of the complaint to answer the charges in writing under oath, together with supporting sworn statements and documents, in which he shall indicate whether or not he elects a formal investigation if his answer is not considered satisfactory. If the answer is found satisfactory, the regional director shall recommend to the Secretary of Health to dismiss the case.

3. Although a respondent does not request a formal investigation, one shall nevertheless be conducted when from the allegations of the complaint and the answer of the respondent, including the supporting documents, the merits of the case cannot be decided judiciously without conducting such an investigation.

4. The investigation shall be held not earlier than five days nor later than ten days from the date of receipt of respondent's answer by the regional director, and shall be finished within thirty days from the filing of the charges, unless the period is extended by the Commission in meritorious cases. The decision shall be rendered by the Secretary of Health within fifteen days from the receipt of the report of the investigation submitted by the regional director. The report shall be submitted within fifteen days from the conclusion of the investigation by the designated investigator in the region to the regional director and the latter shall submit his comments and recommendation on the case to the Secretary of Health within the same period of fifteen days.

5. The direct evidence for the complainant and the respondent shall consist of the sworn statements and documents submitted in support of the complaint or answer, as the case may be, without prejudice to the presentation of additional evidence deemed necessary but was unavailable at the time of the filing of the complaint or answer, upon which the cross-examination, by respondent and the complainant, respectively, shall be based. Following cross-examination, there may be redirect and re-cross-examination.

6. Either party may avail himself of the service of counsel and may require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence in his favor through the compulsory process of subpoena or subpoena duces tecum.

7. The investigation shall be conducted only for the purpose of ascertaining the truth and without necessarily adhering to technical rules applicable in judicial proceedings. It shall be conducted by the regional director concerned or his authorized representative.

E. Appeals:

1. Appeals, were allowable, shall be made by the party adversely affected by the decision within fifteen days from receipt of the decision unless a petition shall be decided within fifteen days. Notice of the appeal shall be filed with the disciplining office, which shall forward the records of the case, together with the notice of appeal, to the appellate authority within fifteen (15) days from filing of the notice of appeal, with its comments, if any. The notice of appeal shall specifically state the date of the decision appealed from and the date of receipt thereof. It shall also specifically set forth clearly the grounds relied upon for excepting from the decision.

2. A petition for reconsideration shall be based only on any of the following grounds:

a. New evidence has been discovered which materially affects the decision rendered;
b. The decision is not supported by the evidence on record;
c. Errors of law or irregularities have been committed prejudicial to the interest of the respondent;

Provided, that only one petition for reconsideration shall be entertained. (Sec. 38, P.D. 807).

F. Summary Proceedings - No formal investigation is necessary and the respondent may be immediately removed or dismissed if any of the following circumstances is present:

1. When the charge is serious and the evidence of guilt is strong;
2. When the respondent is a recidivist or has been repeatedly charged and there is reasonable ground to believe that he is guilty of the present charge.
3. When the respondent is notoriously undesirable.

Resort to summary proceedings by disciplining authority shall be done with utmost objectivity and impartiality to the end that no injustice is committed:

Provided, That removal or dismissal except those by the President himself, or upon his order, may be appealed to the Commission. (Sec. 40, P.D. 807).

G. Definition of Terms:

1. Notoriously undesirable - is a state or quality of being notorious; the condition of being an object of wide or general attention, interest, and comment, but for something reprehensible or scandalous. The test  of being notoriously undesirable is two-fold whether it is common knowledge or generally known as universally believed to be true or manifest to the world that petitioner committed the acts imputed against him, and whether he had contracted the habit for any of the enumerable misdemeanors.

2. A recidivist is used in ordinary sense, that is one who has been found administratively guilty before and there is reasonable ground to believe that he is guilty of the present charge. Lecture of Honorable Catalino Macaraig.

3. Due-process - It is a concept which requires fairness on the part of everyone.

Due-process of law - a law which hears before it condemns, which proceeds upon inquiry and renders judgment only after trial (Webster, Daniel).

H. Proceedings:

Proceedings in administrative bodies are not strictly tied up with the technical rules of evidence and of procedure followed in the ordinary courts. This does not, however, mean that administrative agencies can take short cuts. The constitutional guarantee of due process limits the action. According to our Supreme Court, there are "cardinal primary" rights which administrative agencies are bound to observe, and these are, to put them briefly: (1) the right to a hearing (2) the right of a party to have the tribunal consider his evidence (3) the right to have something to support decision (4) the evidence must be substantial (5) the decision must be based on evidence presented at the hearing or at least contained on the record and disclosed to the parties affected (6) the tribunal must render on its own independent judgment and not simply accept the views of a subordinate in arriving at a decision (7) the tribunal must render its decision in such a manner that the parties can know the issues involved and the reasons for the decision.

SEC. 2. Nothing in this delegation shall be construed as limiting the authority of the Secretary of Health to overrule/revoke/revise/modify any recommendation made by the Regional/Acting Regional Health Director/Officer-in-Charge concerned on any administrative case/complaint investigated, which does not conform with the national or department policies on such legal matters.

SEC. 3. A monthly report on administrative cases/complaints investigated and acted upon shall be submitted to the Department.

SEC. 4. This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>