Republika ng Pilipinas
KAGAWARAN NG KALUSUGAN
TANGGAPAN NG KALIHIM
MAYNILA

<date>02/09/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 276 s. 1976</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing the Pharmacy Interns in Hospitals under the Department of Health, in accordance with Articles II and III, R.A. 5921 and the Special Provision of the General Appropriation Act.</subject>

<body>
In line with the policy of the Department of Health to upgrade and standardize the training of pharmacy interns affiliated with the Teaching and Training Hospitals under the Department of Health and in accordance with Articles II and III of R.A. 5921 and the Special Provision of the General Appropriation Act, the following rules and regulations should be strictly complied with.

I. Responsibilities of the Department of Health Hospitals

1. The Teaching and Training Hospital must be duly licensed in accordance with the Bureau Administrative Order No. 3, series of 1971, of the Bureau of Medical Services, pursuant to the provision of Section 15 of R.A. 4226;

2. The Hospital Pharmacy must meet the requirements prescribed in the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and the Provisions of Administrative Order No. 60, series of 1968, of this Department;

3. The Admission of pharmacy interns should follow the ratio of one intern for every staff pharmacists;

4. Pharmacy Service must be organized with a Pharmacist-in-charge and adequate staff pharmacists rendering 24 hours service;

5. The Chief Pharmacist must be involved in the planning of suitable educational and training program in coordination with the Training Office of the Hospital for professional staff and interns in Pharmacy on matters of drugs and medicines and hospital pharmacy administration;

6. The Chief Pharmacist, preferably must have undergone Hospital Pharmacy Service Management Training Course (given by the Department of Health), or trained in the specialized function of Hospital Pharmacy;

7. There must be a written Standard Operating Procedures in the Pharmacy approved by the Chief of the Hospital;

8. There should be an adequate library and filing system to give information concerning drugs, readily available to pharmacists, physicians and pharmacy students, nurses and other hospital personnel. These include up-to-date compilation of drug literature, pharmacy journals and other books;

9. Special locked storage space should be provided, to meet the legal requirements for the storage of narcotics and other prohibited drugs;

10. A refrigerator should be provided, for the storage of thermolabile products;

11. There should be an adequate floor space for all pharmacy operations with proper lighting and ventilation;

12. Records of training of each intern must be prepared by the Chief Pharmacist and approved by the Chief of the Hospital at the end of internship;

13. Training Hospitals should submit a quarterly report to the Accreditation Committee on Training and Affiliation of Students, Department of Health for evaluation.

II. Joint Responsibility of the Affiliating College of Pharmacy and the Teaching and Training Hospital

1. There must be a written agreement between the affiliating College of Pharmacy and the Training Hospital as specified in the attached Contract of Affiliation (6 copies) coursed to the Secretary of Health through the Chairman, Accreditation Committee on Training and Affiliation of Students.

III. Responsibility of Pharmacy Intern Affiliates

1. The interns should comply strictly with the rules and regulations of the hospital;

2. The pharmacy interns shall pay or replace damages or losses to hospital property, equipment, supplies, etc;

3. Each pharmacy intern shall pay the hospital ₱25.00 for the 160 hours internship within the first five days of training. An increase in the affiliation fee to ₱30.00 for the 160 hours of internship will be incorporated in the special provision of the Department of Health budget for the next fiscal year.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>