Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>02/12/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 278 s. 1976</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Activation and organization of Regional Health Office No. 12, Cotabato City.</subject>

<body>
This Order provides the immediate activation of Regional Health Office No. 12 in accordance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 742 dated July 7, 1976, and establishes the administrative actions to be carried out by other Regional Offices and Services designated to provide advice and assistance to enable the new regional office to get organized and fully operational within the earliest possible date.

A. Regional Health Office No. 12

The Officer-in-Charge shall:

1. Assume the direction, execution and coordination of all health programs and activities within the prescribed area of jurisdiction of the region;

2. Direct the inventory taking of all existing equipment and facilities within the regional area and submit reports thereof to Regional Health Office No. 11 and to Financial and Management Service;

3. Receive and maintain all records and documents related to personnel and property to be transferred by Regional Health Office No. 11;

4. Continue to submit all payrolls, travel claims and other obligations incurred by Regional Office No. 12 field personnel to Regional Health Office No. 11, for payment and/or settlement;

5. Obtain and hold a cash advance of ₱5,000.00 from Regional Health Office No. 11 for the purpose of defraying the operational expenses of the immeidiate office of the Officer-in-Charge, subject to replenishment monthly;

6. Receive additional monthly financial assistance from Regional Health Office No. 10 in the amount not exceeding ₱5,000.00 to defray the operational expenses of the immediate office of the Officer-in-Charge. The obligations incurred monthly by the latter mentioned office shall be submitted to Regional Health Office No. 10 for payment and/or settlement;

7. Submit its proposal on the staffing pattern of the Regional Office for review by the Financial and Management Service;

8. Avail of the assistance of the Administrative and Financial and Management Services from the Central Office in the process of organizing the Regional Office;

9. Receive from Regional Health Office No. 10 and 11 temporary assignments of not more than five (5) personnel from each region to assist him in conducting the operation of the Regional Health Office No. 12; and he shall also determine and/or recommend the categories of personnel to be assigned.

10. Collaborate with the Regional Directors designated in this Order for the orderly implementation of its prescribed provisions.

B. Regional Health Office No. 11

The Regional Health Director shall:

1. Direct the segregation of all pertinent records and documents related to personnel and property, and initiate the action for their orderly transfer to the Officer-in-Charge of Regional Health Office No. 12;

2. Continue to assume the payment and/or settlement of all payrolls, travel claims and other obligations incurred by the field personnel of Regional Health Office No. 12;

3. Provide for the temporary assignments of not more than five (5) personnel to assist the Officer-in-Charge of Regional Health Office No. 12, who shall determine the category of personnel;

4. Provide cash advance in the amount of ₱5,000.00 to defray the operational expenses; and

5. Collaborate with the Officer-in-Charge of Regional Health Office No. 12 for the orderly implementation of the provisions of this Order.

C. Regional Health Office No. 10

The Regional Health Director shall:

1. Provide additional financial assistance in the amount not exceeding ₱5,000.00 per month to defray the operational expenses of the immediate office of the Officer-in-Charge. All obligations incurred by the latter office shall be paid and/or settled by Regional Health Office No. 10;

2. Provide for the temporary assignment of not more than five (5) personnel of different categories to assist the Officer-in-Charge of Regional Health Office No. 12, the latter shall determine the categories of personnel to be assigned; and

3. Collaborate with the Officer-in-Charge for the proper implementation of the provisions of this Order.

D. Financial and Management Service

1. Review the staffing pattern for Regional Health Office No. 12 and submit recommendations;

2. Direct the re-alignment of regional offices' appropriations and submit recommendations covering provision of appropriations to adequately finance all programs and activities of Regional Health Office No. 12, and secure its approval;

3. Provide staff assistance to conduct studies and make recommendations as to office location of the regional office within Cotabato City, determine space requirements and layouts including standard office equipment needs and other facilities, and solutions to special management problems; and

4. Prepare and issue instructions to the Regional Offices concerned for the orderly transfer of all accounts and related records after having established the appropriation of the regional office.

E. Administrative Service

The Chief of Service shall:

1. Develop and conduct programs for the training and orientation of the administrative staff of Regional Health Office No. 12.

F. Reports

All concerned shall submit monthly narrative reports bearing pertinent statistical data related to the progress and results achieved in the implementation of the provisions of this Order. The reports are to be coursed thru the Reports Control Unit of the Financial and Management Service.

G. Rescinding Provisions

Any or all orders inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded.

H. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>