Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>06/07/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 285 s. 1976</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Delegation of Authority to Agency Heads (Central Offices) to Approve Financial Transactions.</subject>

<body>
This Order is issued to authorize the following heads of Department of Health entities to approve disbursements, requisitions and other transactions in connection with the performance of their fiscal responsibilities, in accordance with Part II, Chapter I, Article II-3-c of the Integrated Reorganization Plan as implemented by Letter of Implementation No. 8, dated November 1, 1972:

a. Administrator, Food and Drug Administration
b. Director, Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service
c. Director, Malaria Eradication Service
d. Director, National Family Planning Office
e. Director, National Nutrition Service'
f. Project Director, Dermatology Research and Training Project
g. Chief, Radiation Health Office
h. Chief, National Cancer Control Center
i. Director, Bureau of Quarantine
j. Director, Bureau of Research and Laboratories

I. Approval of Disbursements

Agency Head shall approve disbursements and sign treasury warrants, requests for obligation of allotments, and/or countersign checks, in any amount.

II. Approval of Requisitions and Other Fiscal Actions

Agency Head shall:

a. Approve requisitions as follows:

(1) Requisition thru the Bureau of Supply Coordination (BSC Form No. 1) not to exceed ₱20,000.00 per requisition;
(2) Requisition thru DOPS contracts (BSC Form No. 1-A) not to exceed ₱20,000.00 per requisition;
(3) Local Purchase Orders covering:

a. Emergency (local) purchases of supplies and materials not to exceed ₱5,000.00 per order;
b. Emergency repairs of motor vehicles, office equipment and other non-personal services not to exceed ₱5,000.00 per order; and
c. Direct purchases from NACIDA, PETROPHIL, Bureau of Supply Coordination Stores not to exceed ₱20,000.00 per order.

b. To issue travel orders and approve the itineraries of travel (Appendix A, COA General Circular No. 127) of their respective personnel for periods less than thirty (30) days. The travels of agency heads are to be approved by the Secretary of Health.

III. Limitations

As a general policy, emergency purchases are to be discouraged. Procurement of supplies, materials and equipment must be made through the Bureau of Supply Coordination. It is only in extreme cases as stated in Executive Order No. 302, series of 1940 that emergency purchases of supplies shall be resorted to by any agency concerned.

a. Splitting of requisitions in order to avoid review by higher officials is prohibited. Requisitioner shall consolidate his requirements for the same commodity groups in one requisition if purchase is made from the same funds;

b. Local purchases may be allowed only when items to be procured are obtainable at reasonable prices in the locality or neighboring places;

c. When conducting local purchases, preference shall be given to the procurement of items direct from reputable manufacturers or exclusive distributor to the exclusion of middlemen to preclude overpricing;

d. Whenever needs arise to cope with emergency conditions, agency heads may submit requisitions for supplies, materials and equipment duly certified by the Department Head, for the Bureau of Supply Coordination to procure without public bidding.

Such requisitions, however, shall be made only when prior verification or confirmation has been made that the items to be procured are neither available from the Bureau of Supply Coordination Stores nor from existing DOPS contracts.

IV. Responsibility of Approving Officials

These approving officials shall be accountable for the following:

1. Proper utilization of funds including:

a. Incurrence of obligations to conform with the purposes of the allotment and procurements to be undertaken in accordance with approved procurement programs including submission of reports on emergency purchases made as prescribed under Department Order No. 13 of the Department of General Services;

b. The incurrence of expenditures not to exceed authorized allotments; and

c. That adequate funds are provided to finance all the activities of their respective offices.

2. Proper interpretation of related existing fiscal policies, rules, regulations and observance of prescribed procedures; and

3. Accomplishment of results in accordance with approved financial and work programs.

V. Limitation of Authority

The actions of the approving officials are limited to transactions chargeable to the funds or allotments of their respective offices.

VI. Approval of Transactions by the Department Head

All financial transactions that exceeds the authority delegated to the officials designated in this Order shall require the prior approval of the Department Head.

VII. Rescinding Provisions

Any or all orders or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are rescinded.

VIII. Filing Bond

The duly designated approving officials shall file bond with the Bureau of Treasury as accountable officers in accordance with existing regulations.

IX. Amendments

Any or all actions or recommendations to amend or modify the provisions of this Order shall be initiated by the Chief of the Financial and Management Service.

X. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect as of the date of its issuance.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>