Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>02/16/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 277 s. 1976</docnum>

TO: The Regional Directors, Chiefs of Agencies and Training and Teaching Hospitals.

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and regulations Governing Affiliation of Radiologic Technology Schools and Colleges in Government Hospitals under the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
In line with the policy of upgrading the qualifications of radiologic technologists by proper education and training, a policy set forth by the Radiation Health Office which was created by Presidential Decree No. 480 dated June 6, 1974 and entrusted with the duty of safeguarding the health of the people from the hazards of ionizing radiation, the Department of Health hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with in the affiliation of radiologic technology students in the Department of Health teaching and training hospitals.

I. Responsibilities of the Department of Health Hospitals

Training and teaching hospitals designated by the Secretary of Health where radiologic technology students may affiliate to obtain the desired clinical experience must meet the following requirements:

1. Be a general or special hospital with not less than 100 bed capacity and an average bed occupancy of not less than 80% and have a radiologic X-ray unit for general examinations of not less than 200 mA capacity.

2. Follow the ratio of two (2) radiologic technology student affiliates for each diagnostic X-ray machine per shift.

3. Radiologic technology student affiliation shall be allowed only in the morning (8 A.M. - 12 noon) and afternoon (2 P.M. - 6 P.M.) shifts.

4. Require affiliating colleges and schools of radiologic technology to assign one (1) clinical instructor coming from their school or college to proctor every eight (8) or less radiologic technology student affiliates per shift. Clinical instructors must be in hospital gown or officially prescribed uniform. Special hospitals should require that clinical instructors shall have at least one year radiologic technology or teaching experience before they are allowed to supervise the radiologic technology student affiliates in these special hospitals. These clinical instructors shall submit their bio-data before orientation starts.

5. a. Formulate the general plan for the training of the radiologic technology student affiliates in the hospital before the actual start of the school year.

b. Meet with the principals of affiliating radiologic technology schools sufficiently ahead of the start of the school year and shall schedule meetings with the principal as often as deemed necessary by the hospital, in order to ensure the effective implementation of the affiliation rules of the Department of Health for the upgrading of the standard of radiologic technology education.

6. a. Have a well organized and administered radiological service with qualified and adequate radiological personnel.

b. Orient the clinical instructors coming from the radiologic technology schools and colleges for not less than two (2) weeks and not more than four (4) weeks. Orientation must be given before the actual period of affiliation starts.

7. Have a radiological training staff responsible for the training educational program on the radiological personnel of the hospital including the orientation of new clinical instructors of the affiliating radiologic technology schools.

8. Have a suitable dining space for the faculty and students while on clinical experience in the hospital upon proper arrangement between the school and the hospital authorities.

9. Each radiologic technology student shall be required to perform and/or assist in a total of 400 radiographic examinations as a requirement for the issuance of a certificate of his affiliation training.

Hospital authorities reserve the right and have the duty to suspend or cancel affiliation privileges or any school when the school authorities and/or their respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation; and/or have violated the rules and regulations set; and/or the affiliating students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the patients. The final decision in case any appeal is made by affiliating schools and colleges will be made, however, by the Secretary of Health through the Affiliation Committee.

Department of Health hospitals should enforce the rules and regulations set by this Administrative Order in accepting new radiologic technology schools and colleges for affiliation and in renewing existing contracts with affiliating schools and colleges of radiologic technology for the next school year.

Hospital authorities reserve the right to assign the radiologic technology student affiliates to specific areas of the hospitals where they could be trained effectively.

Hospital authorities shall not allow radiology technology student affiliates to enter the training areas in the hospital without their accompanying clinical instructors from the schools and colleges of radiology technology. Absence of clinical instructors must be reported by the hospital to the schools and colleges concerned and to the Secretary of Health through the Accreditation Committee on Training and Student Affiliation. These reports shall be compiled by the Department of Health and submitted to the Department of Education for appropriate action on the radiologic technology schools and colleges concerned.

Quarterly reports on the affiliation fees received showing the percentage of each category of personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Secretary of Health thru the Accreditation Committee together with the narrative report on the status and/or problems of the Affiliation Program.

II. Responsibilities of the Affiliating Schools/Colleges of Radiologic Technology

All schools and colleges of radiologic technology must have the following requirements before applying for the use of clinical facilities of a general or special training/teaching hospital of the Department of Health:

a. Approval from the Department of Education and Culture
b. Compliance with the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 480

These schools and colleges shall:

1. Provide qualified clinical instructors to guide, teach, supervise and evaluate students' clinical experience in the training/teaching hospital in accordance with the ratio of one (1) clinical instructor per eight (8) students. No student shall be sent to the clinical area without the clinical instructor from the affiliating school or college.

2. Pay or replace damages, breakages or losses by the faculty and students of hospital property, equipment and supplies.

3. See to it that all radiologic technology student affiliates before beginning their clinical practice in a particular clinical area must have satisfactorily completed the theoretical aspect of radiation techniques.

4. Pay the hospital twenty five pesos (₱25.00) for each student per month as will be incorporated in the budget for the next fiscal year. Payment is due within the first five days of each month.

5. Make a request for new affiliation to the Chief of Hospital accomplishing the appropriate standard form of the Contract of Affiliation (6 copies) and coursed through proper channels to the Secretary of Health through the Chairman, Accreditation Committee on Training and Student Affiliation. Contracts shall be subject for renewal every school year by the Chief of Hospital.

6. See to it that the instructors and students observe and abide with the policies, rules and regulations for the hospital and that professional discipline is maintained at all times.

7. See to it that their instructors are in their proper uniform when supervising nursing student affiliates in the hospital.

III. Joint responsibilities of Affiliating Schools and Colleges of Radiologic Technology and the Training and Teaching Hospitals

1. The clinical program of radiologic technology students shall be the joint responsibility of the radiologic technology training staff of the hospital and the clinical instructors of each respective school. Assignments and proper rotation of students for each clinical area shall be prepared in accordance with the aforementioned rules. When there are two or more schools affiliating in a hospital, the assignment of students in a clinical area may be on a two-shift bases.

2. Holding of joint conferences with the authorities of the hospital and the school for the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>