Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>01/07/1977</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 310 s. 1977</docnum>

TO: The Bureau Directors, Regional Directors, Project Directors, Chiefs of Offices and Hospitals directly under the Office of the Secretary, Technical Staff, Unit Heads and others concerned.

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in the disposal of records based on the approved Records Retention and Disposal Schedule No. 1 of the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
You are hereby informed that the Records Retention and Disposal Schedule No. 1 of the Department of Health has been approved by the Bureau of Records Management on January 4, 1977, in accordance with existing law, rules and regulations.

Accordingly, in order to provide all offices under the Department with an efficient and economical records administration, the following procedures are hereby prescribed:

1. The agency concerned shall prepare an inventory of disposable records.

2. The agency should fill out the Request for Authority to Dispose of records (BRM Form No. 3) and submit the same to the Bureau of Records Management in four (4) copies.

3. Upon receipt of the Request for Authority to Dispose of Records, the Director of Records Management shall assign an appropriate Records Management Analyst to inspect the records in the agency.

4. The Bureau of Records Management Analyst assigned shall inspect, examine, and appraise the records listed in BRM Form 3 and check them against the approved Records Retention and Disposal Schedule and existing rules and regulations on the matter, more specifically on the Department of General Services General Circulars Nos. 4 and 6, series of 1963 and 1968, respectively.

5. The Bureau of Records Management analyst shall prepare BRM Form No. 4 (Records Management Analyst Report) which contains the analysis report regarding the records subject for disposal and the most appropriate manner by which they should be disposed of, such as:

(1) transfer to the agency records storage area.
(2) transfer to the Archives of the Bureau of Records Management.
(3) disposal by burning, shredding or sale.

6. The analysis report of the Bureau of Records Management analyst shall be submitted to the Director of Records Management who shall issue to the requesting agency the corresponding authority to dispose of such records.

7. Upon receipt of the authority to dispose, the Bureau of Records Management has the jurisdiction in the actual disposal of the records in the manner specified in the authority (such as burning, shredding or sale), in the presence of a representative each from the requesting agency, the Bureau of Records Management and the Commission on Audit.

8. After disposing of the records, the requesting agency should accomplist a Certificate of Disposal (BRM Form No. 5) duly countersigned by the representatives of the requesting agency, the Bureau of Records Management and the Commission on Audit, each of whom shall be furnished with a copy of the certificate (BRM Form No. 5).

9. Proceeds to the Treasury - (Rule 11 of Article II of the Rules and Regulations governing the disposal of records) In case of sale, the proceeds shall go to the Treasury of the Republic of the Philippines, unless an existing law applicable to the entity provides otherwise.

All agencies should have copies of the pertinent Department of General Services General Circulars for their guidance and reference before recommending disposal of records.

This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>