Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>06/23/1978</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2, s. 1978</docnum>

TO: Regional Health Directors, Provincial Health Officers and Heads of Other Ministry of Health Agencies Concerned

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Dietetic Interns and Undergraduate Nutrition Students of Schools and Colleges in Government Hospitals under the Ministry of Health.</subject>

<body>
Malnutrition is a major health problem in the Philippines requiring skilledmanpower not only in its eradication but also in its prevention. It is a crippling disease affecting not only the body but also the mind and therefore, can be an impediment to national development. Realizing the need for well-trained public health nutritionists and dietitians to support the government's nutrition program and cognizant of its role in the preparatidn of nutrition and dietetics practitioners in the Philippines, the Ministry of Health hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with in the affiliation of Dietetic Interns andendergraduate Nutrition Students of Schools and Colleges in Government Hospitals under the Ministry of Health Agencies.

I. Responsibilities of the Ministry of Health

A. Provinces and municipalities designated by the Ministry of Health thru the National Nutrition service where interns and nutrition students may affiliate to obtain the necessary skills and knowledge in community nutrition must meet the following requirements:

1. A senior dietary nutritionist or a dietary nutritionist must be present in the region or province, respectively, in-order to orient, supervise and guide the nutrition affiliates in their field practice.

2. The province must have on-going nutrition programs such as Mothercraft centers or other organized classes in which at least ten (10) students/interns can participate.

B. Formulation by the National Nutrition Service of the general affiliate training program. 

l. The minimum requirement for the length of affiliation period shall be 120 hours for undergraduate students and 240 hours for dietetic interns.

2. A didactic training at the national level shall be given for one week (5 days) before the affiliates are fielded.

3. Length of field practice shall be four (4) weeks for dietetic interns and two (2) weeks for undergraduate students.

C. Hold conference meetings with-the Heads of affiliating agencies before, during and after affiliation as often as deemed necessary to assure the effective implementation of the Ministry of Health's  affiliation rules and regulations.

D. Require affiliating schools and colleges to assign one (1) nutrition preceptor per twenty-five (25) students. These preceptors shall help in the evaluation and supervision of students as well as the training program.

E. Must have a nutrition training staff responsible for the orientation training program of affiliating students and preceptors.

F. Require the students or dietetic interns to wear their complete uniform.

The place of affiliation will be based on the student's choice subject to the approval of the National Nutrition Service. The Ministry of Health authorities reserve the right to give final approval on the place of assignment of student affiliates.

The Ministry of Health, thru the Accreditation Committee reserves the right and has the duty to suspend or cancel affiliation privileges of any school when the School authorities and/or their respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation and/or have violated the rules and regulations set; and/or the affiliating students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of their subjects. The final decision in case any appeal is made by affiliating schools and colleges shall be made, however, by the Minister of Health through the Accreditation Committee.

The rules and regulations set by this Administrative Order should be enforced by Regional and Provincial Chiefs in accepting affiliating nutrition students and dietetic interns and in renewing existing contracts.

Quarterly reports on the affiliation fees received showing percentage of each category of personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Ministry of Health through the Accreditation Committee together with the narrative report on the Status and/or problems of the affiliation program.

II. Responsibilities of Affiliating  Agencies

Only colleges and schools which are licensed by the Ministry of Education and Culture will be allowed to affiliate with the Ministry of Health agencies.

Affiliating agencies shall:

1. Obtain affiliation contract forms from the National Nutrition Service and accomplish them properly before submission to the Ministry of Health for final approval through the Chairman of the Accreditation Committee.

2. Provide a field preceptor to guide, teach, supervise and evaluate students' field work in accordance with the ratio of l preceptor: 25 students. The field preceptor must have at least one (1) year experience in public health nutrition/dietetic services and must have undergone a one-week orientation with the National Nutrition Service.

3. Guarantee that their affiliates shall be responsible for any damages, breakage and losses of Ministry of Health property, equipment and supplies.

4. <missingtext> </missingtext> (4) weeks duration and of each undergraduate student at two (2) weeks duration.

5. See to it that all interns/students shall have first satisfactoryily completes theoretical aspectsin nutrtion education, normal and therapeutic nutrition, methods of nutritional assessments infant feeding, etc.

6. Remit an affiliation fee of ₱30.00 per student intern for the period covered in affiliation.

7. See to it that instructors and students observe and abide with the policies, rules and regulations set by the Ministry of Health and that professional discipline be maintained at all times.

III. Joint Responsibility of Affiliating Schools/Colleges/internship Committee and the Ministry of Health

1. The training program shall be a joint responsibility of the Ministry of Health and schools/colleges/hospitals. Assignment of students/interns shall be in accordance with the aforementioned rules.

2. Joint conferences of schools/colleges/internship committee with the Ministry of Health officials shall be held to ensure the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

3. Promotion of cooperation and harmonious working relationship among teaching/training personnel and school/hospital personnel.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>