Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>05/17/1978</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 344 s. 1978</docnum>

TO: The Regional Health Directors, Chief of Agencies, and Training and Teaching Hospitals.

<subject>SUBJECT: Amending Administrative Order No. 265 s. 1975 on Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation on Nursing Schools and Colleges in Government Hospitals under the Department of Health, to include Affiliation in Rural Health Units.</subject>

<body>
In line with the directives of President Ferdinand E. Marcos to improve the quality of life of the rural poor and render more effective health care service, the Department of Health, cognizant of its role in the development of manpower relevant to health needs, hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with in the affiliation of nursing students in the Department of Health Teaching and Training Hospitals and Rural Health Units.

I. Responsibilities of the Department of Health Hospitals and Rural Health Units

Training and Teaching Hospitals and Rural Health Units designated by the Secretary of Health where nursing students may affiliate to obtain the desired clinical experiences must meet the following requirements:

For designated Training and Teaching Hospitals:

1. Be a general or special hospital with not less than 100 bed capacity and an average bed occupancy of not less than 80%.

a. General hospitals must have departmentalized medical, surgical, OB-GYN and pediatric services for in-patients and out-patients. If possible, general hospitals should, in addition, set up communicable disease services and psychiatric services.

b. Special hospitals such as the National Mental Hospital, National Orthopedic Hospital, San Lazaro Hospital, Dr. Jose R. Fabella Memorial Hospital, National Children's Hospital together with the Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Hospital may be utilized for the training of nursing student affiliates along these specialized nursing services.

2. Shall follow the ratio of one (1) nursing student affiliate for at least every two (2) patients per shift computed according to the actual percentage of bed occupancy of the hospital. Computation of the ratio will not be based on the number of beds of the hospital nor the number of out-patients served.

3. a. Nursing student affiliation shall be allowed only in the morning and afternoon shifts.

b. Night shift affiliation shall be allowed only in the operating room, delivery room, nursery and emergency room. Nursing students assigned in these areas shall be accompanied by their corresponding clinical instructors. The number of nursing student affiliates assigned to the above-mentioned areas will be decided on by the chief of the hospital in order to avoid unnecessary congestion in these areas.

4. Require affiliating colleges and schools of nursing to assign one (1) clinical instructor coming from their school or college to proctor every twelve (12) nursing students per shift except in the senior year where fifteen (15) students may be allowed. Clinical instructors must be in complete prescribed uniform. Special hospitals should require that clinical instructors shall have at least one year nursing or teaching experience before they are allowed to supervise the nursing student affiliates in these special hospitals. These clinical instructors shall submit their bio-data before orientation starts.

5. a. Formulate the general plan for the training of the nursing student affiliates in the hospital before the actual start of the school year.

b. Meet with the principals of affiliating nursing schools sufficiently ahead of the start of the school year and shall schedule meetings with the principals as often as deemed necessary by the hospital in order to ensure the effective implementation of the affiliation rules of the Department of Health for the upgrading of the standard of nursing education.

6. Have a well organized and administered nursing service with qualified and adequate nursing personnel.

a. Orient the clinical instructors coming from the nursing schools and colleges for not less than two (2) weeks and not more than four (4) weeks. Orientation must be given before the actual period of affiliation starts.

7. Have an adequate, well-maintained physical plant with the provision of necessary equipment and supplies including:

a. An intensive care unit or its equivalent
b. A well-equipped central supply service
c. A well-equipped main conference room
d. Library
e. Nursing Training office
f. Suitable area for small group conferences in the wards

8. Have a nursing training staff responsible for the training educational program on the nursing personnel of the hospital including the orientation of new clinical instructors of the affiliating nursing schools.

9. Have a suitable dining space for the faculty and students while on clinical experience in the hospital upon proper arrangement between the school and the hospital authorities.

For Rural Health Units:

1. Have an organized rural health service to provide the necessary field areas required for community health nursing.

2. Must have an adequate teaching facilities such as conference area, references, and teaching materials.

As part of the Community Health Nursing experience for nursing students affiliating in Rural Health Units, selected 25 beds emergency hospital maybe utilized upon the recommendation of the Provincial Health Officer.

Hospital and Rural Health Center authorities reserve the right and have the duty to suspend or cancel affiliation privileges of any school when the school authorities and/or their respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation; and/or have violated the rules and regulations set; and/or the affiliating students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the patients. The final decision in case any appeal is made by affiliating schools and colleges will be made, however, by the Secretary of Health, through the Accreditation Committee.

Department of Health hospitals should enforce the rules and regulations set by this Administrative Order in accepting new nursing schools and colleges for affiliation and in renewing existing contracts with affiliating schools and colleges of nursing.

Hospital and rural health authorities reserve the right to assign the nursing student affiliates to specific areas of the hospitals and rural health centers where they could be trained effectively.

Hospital and rural health authorities shall not allow nursing student affiliates to enter the training areas in the hospital or field practice area without their accompanying clinical instructors from the nursing schools and colleges. Absence of clinical instructors or a lack in the approved number of clinical instructors must be reported by the hospital and rural health center to the schools and colleges concerned and to the Secretary of Health through the Accreditation Committee on Training and Student Affiliation. These reports shall be compiled by the Department of Health and submitted to the Department of Education and Culture for appropriate action on the nursing schools and colleges concerned.

Any hospital that operates its own school of nursing should not allow any affiliation from private schools and colleges except when its school or nursing does not have the sufficient number of students to adequately fulfill the ratio of one (1) nursing student per two (2) patients per shift computed on the actual percentage of bed occupancy of the hospital.

Yearly reports on the affiliation fees received showing the percentage of each category of personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Secretary of Health thru the Accreditation Committee together with the narrative report on the status and/or problems of the Affiliation Program.

II. Responsibilities of the Affiliation Schools/Colleges of Nursing

All schools and colleges of Nursing must have met the following requirements before applying for the use of clinical facilities of a general or special training/teaching hospital and rural health center of the Department of Health:

a. Approval from the Department of Education and Culture and recommended by the Board of Nursing, Professional Regulation Commission.
b. Compliance with the provisions of the Nursing Law R.A. 4704.

These schools and colleges shall:

1. Provide qualified clinical instructors to guide, teach, supervise and evaluate students' clinical and field experiences in the training/teaching hospitals and rural health centers in accordance with the ratio of one (1) clinical instructor per twelve (12) students except in the senior year where the ratio is fifteen (15) students to one (1) clinical instructor. No student shall be sent to the clinical area without the clinical instructor from the affiliating school or college. This includes nursing students affiliating during the night shift in the operating room, delivery room, nursery, emergency room, lying in and domicilliary services.

2. Pay or replace damages, breakages or losses by the faculty and students of hospital and rural health center, property, equipment and supplies.

3. Enforce that the clinical practice of each student be set at a minimum of 20 hours per week.

4. See to it that all nursing students before beginning their clinical and field practice in a particular area must have satisfactorily completed the theoretical aspect of that area.

5. Pay the hospital or rural health unit the amount of twenty pesos (₱20.00) for each student per month. Payment is due within the first five days of each month.

III. Procedure for filing application for affiliation:

1. In Special Hospitals

Application shall be filed with the Chief of Hospital. Six copies of the duly accomplished contract shall be submitted to the Office of the Chairman, Committee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

2. In Regional and Provincial Hospitals

Application shall be filed with the Chief of Hospital. Six copies of the duly accomplished contract shall be forwarded to the Regional Health Director and submitted to the Chairman, Committee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

3. In Rural Health Centers

Application shall be filed with the Provincial Health Officer. Six copies of the duly accomplished contract shall be forwarded to the Regional Health Director and submitted to the Chairman, Committee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

4. New Schools/College of Nursing applying for  Affiliation must file their application with the Chief of Hospital, or Provincial Health Officer. Six copies of the contract should be duly accomplished and submitted together with the:

a) approval of the Department of Education and Culture;
b) Inspection report of the Board of Nursing, Professional Regulation Commission

5. Renewal of contracts shall be done every two (2) years to include a status report of the school/college of nursing together with the submission of necessary forms as required by the Committee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

IV. Joint Responsibilities of Affiliating Schools and Colleges of Nursing and the Training and Teaching Hospitals and Rural Health Centers

1. The clinical and field practice program of nursing students shall be the joint responsibilities of the nursing training staff of the hospital and rural health centers as well as the clinical instructors of each respective school. Assignments and proper rotation of students for each area shall be prepared in accordance with the aforementioned rules. When there are two or more schools affiliating, the assignment of students may be on a two-shift basis.

2. Holding of joint conferences by the authorities of the hospital and rural health centers with the school for the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

3. Promotion of cooperation and harmonious working relationships among the teaching/training rural health center personnel and school personnel. Periodic dialogue between the Nursing Service, Training Staff and the Nursing Schools/Colleges should be held in order to entertain suggestions and thresh out problems related to the program for the benefit of the patients and the students.

V. Special Provisions:

1. All schools of nursing under the Department of Health affiliating with other teaching and training hospitals and rural health centers of the Department of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees and the signing of the appropriate Contract of Affiliation.

2. All other government schools and colleges of nursing such as Colleges of Nursing of State Universities affiliating with teaching and training hospitals and rural health centers of the Department of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees. They shall however be required to sign the appropriate Contract of Affiliation.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>