Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
MANILA

<date>01/30/1978</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 340, S. 1978</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: BCG IMMUNIZATION AS A COMPONENT OF THE EXPANDED PROGRAM ON IMMUNIZATION</subject>

<body>
TO: All Bureau Directors, Regional Health Directors, Provincial, City and Municipal Health Officers, Provincial/City Nurse Supervisors and Others Concerned.

With the formulation and development of the Expanded Program on Immunization, the BGC immunization component of the National Tuberculosis Program is now integrated in the Expanded Program in Immunization which is concerned with all the immunization programs in the country.

Specifically, the following lines of relationship and coordination between the various health personnel involved at various levels of administration shall be maintained.

1. National Level

1. The National Immunization Committee (NIC) as created by Department Order No. 28-A. s. 1976, is charged with the development of immunization programs against specific preventable diseases including BCG immunization against tuberculosis.

2. The T.B Control Services, Bureau of Health and Medical Services, shall provide technical assistance to the said Committee in the planning, programming and evaluation of the BCG immunization program.

2. Regional Level

1. The Regional Immunization Officers shall assists the Regional Health Directors in the implementation of the Regional Immunization Programs including BCG immunization, as well as provide technical supervision over the field health personnel involved in immunization.

2. The Regional Tuberculosis Coordinators as designate, shall provide technical assistance to the Regional Immunization Officers in the field of BCG immunization especially with regards to assessment and training.

3. Provincial/City levels

1. The Provincial/City Nurse Supervisors shall assist the Provincial/City Health Officers in the implementation of the Immunization Programs in their respective areas and provide technical supervision over the public health nurses involved in immunization.

2. The Provincial TB Coordinators shall provide technical assistance to the Provincial/City Nurse Supervisors in the field of BCG immunization especially with regards to the training of health personnel on BCG techniques and shall serve as independent assessors of BCG immunization musing the scar survey technique.

3. Nursesof the Philippine Tuberculosis Society, depending on the availability of vaccines, may undertake BCG immunization on contacts and other population groups who may require protection, and shall submit their corresponding monthly reports on immunization performed to the Provincial/City Health Officers for incorporation in the prescribed EPI reports.

4. Municipal Level

1. The immunization teams composed of nurses and midwives of the rural health units shall undertake the actual implementation of immunization programs including BCG immunization. In accordance with the Expanded Programs in Immunization (EPI), BCG immunization is now given to infants (3-14 months) and when in conjunction with DTP, on the right arm, and to school entrants, during designated immunization rounds twice a year.

2. Other medical and health personnel in the locality as those in the hospitals, clinics and priavte practitioners, depending on the availability of vaccines, may undertake BCG immunization on contacts of T.B. cases, and such other population groups as may require protection, and shall submit reports on immunization performed to the local health officers who shall consolidate such reports in the prescribed EPI reports.

3. Reports of all immunization including BCG from the local level must came only from the Local Health Officers in accordance with the prescribed reporting procedure in the EPI, and to be submitted thru their corresponding Provincial/City Health Officers and Regional Health Directors, whos shall consolidate such reports, to hte NIC. The NIC shall process and analyze these reports from the fields and provide all agencies concerned with such information portaining to BCG immunization.

The understanding and participation of all medical and health personnel involved in BCG immunization in accordance with the above lines of coordination and relationship which shall serve as their guidelines in such participation, is hereby enjoined.

This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

JJD/