Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>09/12/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 43 s. 1979</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on administrative matters, flow of papers and delegation of authority to certain officials in the Office of the Minister.</subject>

<body>
In order to further streamline office procedures and to expedite action on admininstrative matters, the following guidelines, delegations of authority and proper coursing of communications in the Office of the Minister are hereby issued for the information, guidance, reference and strict compliance by all concerned:

1. For the Minister of Health:

A. Appointments, resignations, retirement applications or requests for transfer of all officials occupying positions from Range 66 or over in the Career Service

B. Issuance of ministry circulars, administrative orders, Ministry Orders and other administrative issuances for the Central and Field Offices

C. Approval of contracts of lease

D. Administrative complaints involving the above-mentioned officials and/or up to division chief level

E. Decisions on administrative cases

F. Decisions on protested appointments except those delegated to Regional Health Directors

G. All requisitions and purchase orders for drugs and medicines involving the field health offices

H. Requisitions and purchase orders for drugs, medicines, equipment, supplies or materials from any of the hospitals directly under the Office of the Minister

I. Legal Opinions of the Ministry

J. Increase in the bed capacity of hospitals

K. Reclassification of key positions in all offices

L. Approval of compensation benefits under Section 699 of the Revised Administrative Code

M. Approval of requisitions, and purchase orders for supplies, materials or equipment in the Central Office.

N. Requests to travel abroad on official business, official time or on leave of absence, to engage in private business or in private employment, to teach or continue studies after office hours, or to acquire public land

The following delegations of authortiy are hereby granted to the officials herein mentioned:

1. The Deputy Minister of Health

A. To sign appointments in the first and second level of the Career Service up to Range 65, except those previously delegated to Regional Health Directors

B. To approve requests for transfer/resignations and recommend the retirement applications of personnel occupying positions from Range 57 to Range 65

C. To approve applications for leave of absence without pay beyond six months but not exceeding one year

D. To handle and act on administrative complaints involving personnel below level of division chiefs

E. To recommend requests for reclassification of positions below division chied level when such conforms with the organizational structure of the particular office as approved by the Ministry

F. To handle and act on protested appointments as Chairman of the Ministry Complaints Committee

G. To handle and act on requests for compensation, disability retirement applications and other similar cases as Chairman of the Physical Examination Committee

H. To approve the disposition of records being sent to the Bureau of Records Management

I. To handle other matters which may be referred to him from time to time by the Minister

2. The Acting Assistant Secretary for Personnel Management and Development

A. To approve requests for transfer/resignations and recommend applications for retirement of officials and employees occupying positions from Range 38 to Range 56.

B. To certify to the attendance of health officials and employees in the required pre-departure briefings of the Rural Service Program

C. To handle and act on papers pertaining to the Future Leaders Program, Rural Service Program and the Buklod ng Kabataan Kawani and all other matters pertaning to Personnel Management and Development

D. To handle and act on routinary matters pertaining to the Career Executive Service Officers in the Ministry

E. To sign certificates of appearance of field personnel when their travel to Manila has been authorized by the Minister of Health, the Regional Health Directors or their Chiefs of Hospitals for a prescribed period of time

F. To handle and act on applications for employment

G. To handle and act on any other matters which may be referred to him by the Minister or Deputy Minister from time to time

3. The Acting Chief, Administrative Service

A. To approve applications for leave of absence with pay, whether with commutation of salary or not, of all officials and employees in the Central Office

B. To approve applications for leave of absence without pay, not exceeding six months of the above-mentioned personnel

C. To approve clearance certificates from property and money accountabilities after proper action thereon by the appropriate officials

D. To approve abstracts of canvass of prices made by the Supply Section and the Transport Section.

E. To approve purchase orders for supplies and materials requisitioned by the Central Office where the amount does not exceed ₱3,000 for any one transaction

F. To sign payrolls of the officials and employees in the Central Office

G. To refer contracts of lease involving health personnel or offices to the Bureau of Buildings and Real Property Management for reasonableness of price before final approval by the Ministry

H. To sign certificates of appearance of field personnel in the absence of the authorized official

I. To handle and act on other matters which may be referred from time to time by the Minister of Health, the Deputy Minister or other higher officials

In the implementation of this Order, proper coursing of communications should be strictly observed by chiefs of divisions and lower echelon personnel. Correspondence prepared for the signature of the Minister should be gone over and initialled by the Deputy Minister and the officials referred to in this order. The same procedure applies to official papers prepared for the signature of the Deputy Minister and the other officials.

All matters not covered in this Order or those which are highly technical in nature, primarily confidential or policy determining, shall be acted upon and prepared for the signature of the Minister of Health. Nevertheless, such papers shall be course through the Deputy Minister and any of the Assistant Secretaries for their perusal, modification, alteration and initial as the case maybe.

All previous administrative orders inconsistent herewith are hereby revoked.

This Order takes effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>