Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>02/05/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 17 s. 1979</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT : Guidelines in Accounting for Expenses and Collections of Regional Mental Hospitals</subject>

<body>
In line with the decentralization plan for the National Mental Hospital, initially transferring the technical and administrative control and supervision of the National Mental Hospital Extension Services to the Regional Health Offices as embodied in Ministry Orders No. 73-C, 75-B, 88, 88—A and 96 all series of 1978, the following guidelines are issued with regard to financial control:

I. Funding Authority and Accounting System

A. The National Mental Hospital shall furnish/issue the following for its regional hospitals to the regional health director of the regional health office having jurisdiction over the hospitals concerned:

1. Monthly - copy of an approved Request for Obligation of Allotment which shall be the authority to incur obligations for the month covered under the objects indicated up to the amount respectively specified.

2. Quarterly - a Cash Disbursement Ceiling which shall be the authority to disburse funds out of the national treasury thru the use of TCAA checks in payment of obligations authorized.

B. The regional chief accountants shall maintain the control of the obligational and disbursements authority.

1. Unused balance of authorized allotment for the month cannot be used for expenses of succeeding months. It automatically reverts to the allotment of the National Mental Hospital.

2. Likewise, unexpended balance of the CDC at the end of the quarter cannot be carried over to the succeeding quarter.

C. TCAA checks shall be used in payment of obligations which shall use the code of the National Mental Hospital (A5912) except-petty cash disbursement.

D. Hospital collections shall be remitted to the National Treasury with the corresponding Remittance Advices, to the credit of the National Mental Hospital using <missingtext> </missingtext>

E. Government Accounting procedures prescribed for similar situation shall apply.

F. There shall be a centralized accounting system. Accounting for financial transactions shall be booked up in the National Mental Hospital Central Office.

II. General Guidelines

A. All previous cash advances from the National Mental Hospital Central Office shall be liquidated by the regional disbursing officers in the
same office before a new cash advance is issued them by the regional health office concerned for disbursement purposes.

Cash advance for salaries shall be segregated from the cash advance for petty disbursements.

Subsequent cash adyances for salaries shall be accompanied by a duly accomplished statement of account current showing among others, the official receipt number of the deposit of any balance of the previous cash advance, and the report of disbursements with the payrolls.

Cash advances for petty disbursement shall be replenished by the regional health offices upon submission of the report of disbursements.

B. Obligations incurred but not liquidated within the same quarter, the corresponding sub-CDC for which has lapsed, shall be forwarded to the National Mental Hospital Central Office for settlement.

C. Bonding requirement of all accountable officers shall be observed.

D. Signatories:

1. General Vouchers

a. Signatory to Certificate No. 1 shall depend upon the nature of the expense covered, towit:

1) Supply Officer-if the general voucher covers payment of supplies and materials.

2) Pharmacist- if it covers payment of drugs and medicines.

3) Dietitian- if it covers payment of foodstuffs.

b. Certificate No. 2 shall be signed by the chief of the National Mental Extension Hospital concerned.

c. Certificate No. 3 shall be signed by the regional health director concerned or his duly authorized representative.

d. Certificate No. 4 shall be signed by the regional accounting officials.

3. If the transaction involved is subject to pre-audit, Certificate No. 5 shall be signed by the regional auditor having jurisdiction in the place. Arrangement should be made with him to the end that inspection of procurements shall be undertaken by the representative of the Commision on Audit stationed at the nearest office to the hospital concerned.

2. RIV's
RIV's shall be made by end-users, such as the supply officer for supply and materials of general use, dietitian for foodstuffs and pharmacist for drugs and medicines and approved by the chief of hospital.

3. Purchase Orders
Purchase Orders shall be signed by the chief of hospital and approved by the regional health director.

E. The use of the stock account by regional mental hospitals shall be discontinued. All available stocks on hand as the effectivity of this circular shall be issued for consumption the cost thereof chargeable against the obligational authority at the time of issue. Such issue shall be reported to the National Mental Hospital Central Office thru the Regional Health Office for proper funding by the regional chief accountant.

III. Responsibilities:

A. National Mental Hospital shall:

1. Issue Advice of Cash Disbursement Ceiling to the different regional offices with National Mental Hespital Extension Service at the start of the quarter.

2. Furnish copy of duly approved request for obligation of allotment (ROA) to the regional offices at the start of the month for estimated expenses.

3. Furnish blank TCAA checks to deputized disbursing officers.

4. Make necessary arrangement so that the Bureau of the Treasury, PNB, and other offices concerned are advised of the authorized signatories of TCAA checks.

B. Regional Health Director shall:

1. Maintain the control of the funds for the National Mental Hospital Extension Service thru its Financial and Management Division.

2. Transmit Within the 5th day following the Report of Disbursements, General Form No. 96-A and Report of Collection, General Form No. 99 by disbursing and collecting officers.

3. Issue/replenish cash advance to disbursing officers.

<missingtext> </missingtext>from the National Mental Hospital.

5. Sign of delegate authority to sign approval of disbursements and sign/countersign TCAA checks pertaining to disbursements of the National Mental Hospital.

6. Approve requisition and purchase orders of National Mental Hospital Extension Service under his jurisdiction.

C. Regional Chief Accountant shall:

1. Control the obligated amount in monthly ROA received.

2. Certify to the availability of funds on vouchers/PO and RIV based on the approved ROA.

3. Maintain record of payments made, index cards.

D. Regional Cashiers shall:

1. Submit to the National Mental Hespital-Central Office, the monthly Report of Disbursements by Deputized Disbursing Officers, General Form No. 108~A, with the corresponding checkstabs and paid vouchers, thru the regional accountant and director.

E. National Mental Hospital—Extension Service Disbursing and Collecting Officers shall:

1. Submit reports of disbursements and reports of collections to the regional health office within the 4th day following the date of report.

IV. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect on January 2 ,1979.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>