Republic of the Philippines
MINISTRY OF HEALTH
Office of the Minister
Metro Manila

<date>03/27/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 18 s. 1979</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Delineation of duties and responsibilities of accountable officers in the Collection and Disbursement Section, General Services Division, Administrative Service.</subject>

<body>
In order to carry out efficiently and effectively the functions of the Collection and Disbursement Section, all accountable officers under the said Section shall have the following duties and responsibilities as delineated below:

1. Miss NORA G. LIMJAP, Cashier V, (Chief, Collection and Disbursement Section) shall handle the cash and check disbursements and collections of the Office of the Minister.

She shall sign checks up to ₱100,000.00 and shall likewise sign all checks beyond the limit of authority delegated to the Cashier II, Cashier I and Disbursing Officers of the Section.

2. Mr. RUSTICO C. SANTOS, Cashier II, shall handle the cash and check disbursements and collections of the Bureau of Health Services, Bureau of Medical Services and the Office of Health Education and Personnel Training.

He shall sign checks up to ₱2,000.00 only and shall take charge of all the duties and responsibilities of the Chief of the Section, including the authority to sign checks up to ₱100,000.00 in the absence of the latter.

He shall, likewise, take charge of the duties and responsibilities of Mrs. Norberta S. Lara, Cashier I, whenever the latter is either on rural service or on leave of absence.

3. Mrs. NORBERTA S. LARA, Cashier I, shall handle the cash and check disbursements and collections of the Radiation Health Office, Dermatology Research & Training Project and the Bureau of Dental Health Services.

She shall sign checks up to ₱1,000.00 only and shall, likewise, assume the duties and responsibilities of Mr. Santos, Cashier II, whenever the latter is either on rural service or on leave of absence.

She shall also sign checks under the Office of the Minister whenever Mrs. Adelaida F. Arches, Disbursing Officer, is on leave of absence or on rural service.

The duties and responsibilities of Mrs. Lara under the Nat. Cancer Control Cener shall be assumed by Mr. Bienvenido Rivera, Cashier I, the regular incumbent thereof effective April 1, 1979.

4. Mrs. FELISA C. DUNASCO, Disbursing Officer, shall handle the check disbursements of the Field Operations under the Office of the Minister including the Rural Health Practice Program.

She shall coordinate with the Program Coordinator and other officials in connection with the effective implementation of the said program and shall, likewise, take charge of the requisition of blank TCAA checks from the Bureau of the Treasury and the issuance of same to the accountable officers of this Ministry, which is formerly handled by Mrs. Lara.

5. Mrs. ADELAIDA F. ARCHES, Disbursing Officer, shall assist the Chief, Collection and Disbursements of the Office of the Minister and shall sign checks up to ₱500.00 only.

6. Mr. LEOPOLDO FUENTES, designated Special Disbursing Officer, shall handle the cash and check disbursements and collections of the Schistosomiasis Control Council, under the direct supervision of the Chief of the Section and shall sign checks up to ₱1,000.00 only, in addition to his regular duties as Clerk II.

All the above-named accountable officers shall prepare the necessary reports required of them in connection with their respective duties and responsibilities.

The Chief of the Collection and Disbursement Section is hereby directed to undertake all the necessary steps in order to carry out the proper implementation of this Order.

This supersedes and revokes Administrative Order No. 307, series of 1976 and all other orders relative to the delegation of duties & responsibilities of the above-mentioned accountable officers of this Ministry.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>