<date>06/12/1980</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 90-C 1980</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in the implementation of the MOH-Assisted Residency Training Program (Subsidy Program)</subject>

<body>
Under Administrative Order No. 60 s. 1979, specifically Part II, No. 4.1, residents in their third or fourth year of training in non-Ministry of Health Medical Centers may be offered financial assistance by utilizing a vacant MOH resident item for the purposes of inducing them to accept assignments in selected rural areas for training and service. In order to properly implement this program, the following implementing rules and regulations are hereby issued:

1. The Ministry, through the Medical Manpower Development Committee, shall send a telegram to the Chief of a Ministry of Health Training hospital to inquire if he is willing to subsidize a training resident, citing his area of specialization and the medical center where he will be trained.

2. The chief of hospital will confirm by wire his acceptance of the proposal where a position of resident shall be provided to the training resident. The item number of the position, the name of the former incumbent, if any, and his status, and a certification that funds are available therefor shall be included in the telegram. A sample form is attached for reference and guidance.

3. Upon receipt of acceptance, the Ministry through the Committee shall notify the training resident of the availability of the position. Accordingly, he shall be asked to submit the necessary supporting papers required under the Civil Service Law and Rules, copy attached, for his immediate compliance. A letter of recommendation and authorization by the Director of non Ministry of Health Training Hospital that the resident can be appointed by MOH hospital under the subsidy program shall also be asked for submission.

4. Upon submission of these papers to the Committee, his papers will be submitted to the Ministry through the MOH Selection Board together with its recommendation. The Board subsequently recommends his appointment which is prepared in the MOH Personnel Division for the signature of the Minister.

5. Upon approval thereof, the training resident executes an agreement with the Ministry, copy attached, whereby he agrees to serve at least one year in the hospital which is subsidizing his training either as a senior resident physician or medical specialist and which includes a penalty clause in case of his non-compliance with the provisions of the agreement.

6. The Ministry, through the Committee, sends a copy of the agreement entered into by the Ministry and the training resident, together with the original copy of the resident's appointment and supporting papers, to the subsidizing hospital. During the period of his training, the training resident shall receive only the salary for the position as approved by the proper authorities but shall not be entitled to any other allowances or per diems.

7. The training resident shall receive his salary regularly from the hospital concerned through the Cashier of the Office of the Minister, after satisfying the requirements for the payment of his salary as provided in the Accounting and auditing rules.

8. The Accounting Division of the Ministry shall bill the salary of the training resident against the funds of the hospital concerned. The amount corresponding to the salary of the training resident shall be remitted by the hospital in settlement of the accounts.

9. While the training resident undergoes training in the Medical Center chosen by the Ministry, the hospital shall reserve an item of senior resident physician or medical specialist to which he can be appointed prior to the termination of the residency training. This information shall be clearly stated by the hospital in its confirmation of acceptance of the agreement by identifying the position to be given after the residency training.

10. Before his term of residency ends, the training resident shall submit supporting papers for his appointment as senior resident physician or medical specialist to the hospital through the Committee.

11. The Committee in turn submits the required supporting papers to the Ministry together with its recommendation, through the MOH Selection Board.

12. The Board acts favorably on the recommendation and his papers are prepared for the signature of the Minister and sent to the Civil Service Commission for appropriate action.

13. Upon approval by the proper authorities, and after the termination of his residency training, the Committee prepares a Ministry Order directing him to proceed to the hospital which subsidized his training. The resident shall bring along with him the original copy of his appointment, other supporting papers together with a copy of his travel order for reimbursement by the hospital concerned.

14. The training resident reports to the Chief of hospital for proper orientation before assuming his duties in accordance with his approved appointment, which now includes other privileges specified in the appointment.

15. In case of conflict over interpretations of the agreement, the matter shall be submitted to the Office of the Minister, either by the hospital or by the Medical Manpower Development Committee, for appropriate action and decision.

This Order takes effect upon approval.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>