Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>06/05/1980</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 90 s. 1980</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines and related procedures for accounting of funds alloted for the construction of Barangay Health Stations.</subject>

<body>
PURPOSE: To effectively implement the construction of the Barangay Health Stations under the amended Loan Agreement No. 1035 PH (Population Project I) per Memorandum of Agreement of the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Local Government and Community Development and the Ministry of Finance.

1.0 General Guidelines:

l.l Releases of allotments for the construction of Barangay Health Stations shall be taken up in the books in the Accounting Division, Ministry of Health.

1.2 The Budget Division of the Ministry of Health shall prepare the Request for Obligation of Allotment (ROA) to cover the cost of construction of a Barangay Health Station.

General Voucher in favor of the municipal treasurer to be designated by the Ministry of Finance shall be prepared by the Ministry of Health, Budget Division to cover the remittance of the alloted fund for the construction of the Barangay Health Stations.

1.3 The Accounting Division of the Ministry of Health shall obligate the funds and process the general voucher. The transfer of cash allotment shall be treated in the books as "Prepayment".

l.4 The check payable to the municipal treasurer designated by the Ministry of Finance as its representative to the project shall be made.

l.5 The municipal treasurer shall deposit the check received from Ministry of Health into a trust deposit account.

Incurrence of expenditures out of the funds shall be in accordance with the disbursement procedure under paragraph 2.

l.6 Expenditures incurred for the construction of the Barangay Health Station shall be paid out of the trust deposit created for the purpose through checks drawn by the municipal treasurer.

1.7 The municipal treasurer shall submit to the Accounting Division, Ministry of Health the certification of completion of Barangay Health Station, acceptance by the Barangay Captain and certification of the Municipal Development Council on the expenditures incurred in the construction. These documents to be verified and found correct by the Auditor shall support the journal voucher to be drawn to capitalize the asset account in the books of Minstry of Health and adjust the prepayment account so as to charge the expenditures against the proper account.

2.0 Disbursement Procedures:

2.1 Barangay Captain shall prepare requisition and issue voucher to cover all materials needed in the construction based on the specification of the approved plan.

2.2 The Municipal Health Officer who shall be the representative of the Ministry of Health shall approve the requisition.

2.3 The Municipal Development Council shall prepare the canvass papers and purchase orders for the materials needed to be approved by the Municipal Health Officer.

2.4 The Barangay Captain shall receive the materials in the presence of a Commission on Audit representative.

2.5 The Municipal Development Council shall prepare the general voucher to pay the materials.

2.6 The Municipal Development Council shall recommend approval of the voucher. The Barangay Captain shall sign certificate #1 and the Municipal Health Officer shall sign certificate #2.

2.7 Municipal Treasurer shall sign certificate #3, prepare the check after it has been audited if the amount is ₱10,000.00 or above. Disbursement of fund should be in accordance with existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

2.8 Labor contracts are to be signed by the Barangay Captain and the Municipal Development Council and approved by the Municipal Health Officers.

2.9 Payrolls are to prepared by the Municipal Development Council, certified by the Barrio Captain, attested by the MDC.

2.10 All payrolls shall be approved by the Municipal Health Officer.

This Order shall take effect immediately. Strict compliance with the above guidelines is enjoined of all concerned.
</body>

<sign>J. C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>(Deputy Minister of Health)
Officer-in-Charge</signtitle>