TANGGAPAN NG MINISTER
Maynila

<date>05/15/1980</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 84 s. 1980</docnum>

TO: All officials and employees under the Office of the Minister, Bureaus, Regional Health Offices, Provincial and City Health Offices, Training, Provincial and Emergency Hospitals, Sanitaria and Projects, Units and others concerned

<subject>SUBJECT: Procedure in Evaluating and Granting Merit Salary Increase and other awards for Employees who obtained Outstanding Performance Rating</subject>

<body>
In line with the spirit of LOI No. 562 and for purposes of uniformity in the implementation of the rules/regulations/guidelines for selective merit increases, as provided for in the joint Budget Circular No. 286 and Civil Service Memorandum Circular No. 3 effective January 1, 1978, there is hereunder prescribed the procedure in evaluating and granting such merit salary increases and other awards for employees who obtained outstanding performance rating in accordance with the new performance appraisal system.

The Procedure -

1. An outstanding performance rating obtained by an employee and recommended by his supervisor should be forwarded, through the Personnel Officer, to an Outstanding Performance Review Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Local Committee), to be created in the Bureau, Office, Service, Project, Hospital, etc. ("Division Level"), under the Ministry of Health by their respective Heads, for purposes of evaluation and verification as to whether or not said employees deserve said rating.

2. The Local Committee shall be composed of the following members:

One (1) Representative of the Management (Key Official)
Two (2) Representatives of Supervisor (1-Division Chief; 1-Section Chief)
Two (2) Representative of Rank and File Employees

3. The Local Committee <missingtext> </missingtext> and evaluate, on the basis of the new performance appraisal system and other information or evidence presented, all outstanding performance ratings obtained by the employees of the particular agency.

4. The Committee shall then recommend to the Head of Agency the employee/s who should actually be given an outstanding performance rating including the one (1) step merit salary increase, as provided in the attached tabulation of Merit Increase Schedule for Outstanding Employees.

4.1 The Committee shall also select and recommend the most outstanding employee, in case there are more than one, who shall be the agency's candidate for additional awards.

5. The Head of Agency shall assess the merits of the proposal or recommendation of the Committee. If found meritorious and funds are sufficient for the purpose, he shall instruct the Personnel Officer to take the necessary steps for the implementation of the merit increase.

5.1 He shall also submit to the Minister of Health (Attn: The Chairman, Employee Suggestion and Incentive Awards Committee (ESIAC)), the candidate of his agency for additional awards.

6. In case an employee does not agree with the adverse findings and recommendation of the Committee, or with those of the Head of Agency, and believes he rightfully deserves the outstanding performance rating his supervisor gave him, he may appeal in writing, first, to the agency head if it is the Committee's recommendation he is contesting, or to the ESIAC, if it is that of the Agency Head, within three (3) days upon receipt of such adverse action. He should cite his reasons and furnish said bodies with pertinent papers, data, information and other evidence in support of his protest.

6.1 Such protest shall be decided within five (5) days upon submission

6.2 The decision of ESIAC shall be final upon approval by the Minister of Health

7. The ESIAC shall review and further evaluate the outstanding performance rating of all the candidates recommended by the different agency heads from each group.

<missingtext> </missingtext> employees entitled to the two (2) steps salary increase, notifying the agency head concerned for the implementation thereof. Those chosen shall represent the particular group of offices under the Central Office/Regional Level, and at the same time, they are considered candidates for the Most Outstanding Employee of the Ministry of Health for the Year.

7.2 It shall then assess and recommend to the Minister of Health the best five (5) candidates for the Most Outstanding Employee of the Ministry of Health for the Year.

8. There shall be created in the Office of the Minister of Health a body that will assess, select, and recommend to the Minister the Most Outstanding Employee of the Ministry of Health for the Year.

8.1 This Body shall be composed of the following:

8.1.1 )
8.1.2 ) The three (3) Assistant Secretaries
8.1.3 )
8.1.4 One chief of Hospital
8.1.5 One Regional Health Director

9. Aside from the salary step increase, the Ministry of Health Most Outstanding Employee of the Year shall receive an additional award in the form of cash, plaque, trophy, and the like as may be determined by the Minister of Health upon recommendation of the MOH Outstanding Employee Review Committee.

9.1 Said employee shall also be recommended to the Civil Service Commission as the Ministry of Health's candidate for other awards as provided under pertinent existing rules and regulations.

10. Granting of these merit salary increases and other awards shall be subject to the availability of funds and the limitations provided under BC Circular No. 286 and CSC MC No. 3, s. 1978.

This Order takes effect upon approval by the Civil Service Commission.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>