Republika ng Pilipinas
Ministri ng Kalusugan
TANGGAPAN NG MINISTER
Maynila

<date>01/05/1980</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 65 s. 1980</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Prohibition against the employment of members of a family related within the 3rd degree either of affinity of consanguinity in the same institution, hospital or office under the Ministry of Health not covered by nepotism</subject>

<body>
Under Department Circular No. 86 dated June 30, 1967, heads of offices under this Ministry had been discouraged from employing direct members of a family related either by affinity or consanguinity. The employment of both husband and wife and other direct members of a family, while it may not violate the rules on nepotism under existing civil service laws and regulations, still deprive other qualified persons from being gainfully employed. Thus, it negates the equality of opportunity to others who are more qualified for employment and gives rise to a wrong public impression that the hospital or office has become a family corporation or operates on a tayo-tayo system.

This practice which is specially true among certain hospitals negates the developmental values required by the New Society and violates a well-established policy. It may have come about due to a lack of information thereon or a willful intent to ignore the policy by the heads of offices concerned or by those who initiates personnel transactions in the office.

Accordingly, the following regulations are hereby issued for the information, guidance, reference and strict compliance of all officials and employees under this Ministry:

1. No relative within the prohibited 3rd degree of affinity or consanguinity shall be employed in the same hospital or office, regardless of whether or not there is exercise of supervision or control over the appointee which is expressly covered by the rules on nepotism under existing civil service laws and regulations.

2. Where there is already employed in the same hospital or office more than one relative within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity, upon the separation thereof through resignation, retirement or death, the resulting vacancy shall be filled by another person qualified for appointment but not related to the remaining family member within the prohibited degree.

3. This policy shall apply to medical personnel, para-medical personnel and non-medical personnel.

4. These provision shall not apply to appointments in the field health units, e.g malaria units, rural health units, schistosomiasis units, skin, social hygiene or T.B. clinics, provided that the appointee who maybe related to another within the prohibited degree of consanguinity or affinity will not be assigned to the same field unit.

5. This prohibition shall cover only original appointments in the hospital or office covering permanent, temporary or casual employment.

6. The only exception shall be in the depressed areas where specialized skills may not be available. In no case, however, shall these apply to non-medical or para-medical personnel.

7. Where there is more than one member of a family within the prohibited 3rd degree of consanguinity or affinity already employed in a hospital or office, the head of office concerned shall submit a report of the names thereof, their positions, their assignments and the dates of their original appointments to this Office not later than February 15, 1980.

8. The head of office or recommending official shall include in the letter of transmittal to the approving official the following statement:

"It is hereby certified that the rules on nepotism as well as the provisions of Administrative Order No. 65 dated January 5, 1980 of the Ministry of Health have been strictly observed in the preparation of this appointment."

Violation of this Order shall constitute sufficient basis for disciplinary action against the certifying official.

This Order takes effect January 16, 1980.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>