Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>12/03/1980</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 113 s. 1980</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in Financing the Activities of the Philippine Population Project II, Development Credit Agreement No. 923 PH.</subject>

<body>
I. RELEASE OF ALLOTMENTS AND CASH DISBURSEMENT CEILING

Upon receipt from the Ministry of the Budget of the Advice of Allotment and Cash Disbursement Ceiling, the Financial and Management Service thru the Budget Division shall:

A. Advise the variouos project components of their respective allocations;

B. Require submission of schedules of itemized project activities by components based on quarterly allocations;

C. Prepare, effective January 1, 1981, sub-advice of allotment (SAA) and sub-advice of Cash Disbursement Ceiling (SACDC) for regional offices based on the approved schedules of activities of each component in accordance with Budget Circular No. 246;

D. Retain balances if unallocated allotments for expenditures of components' central activities;

E. Distribute the SAA's and SACDC's duly supported with copies of the schedule of activities of components to:

1. Distribution of Sub-Advice of Allotment

a. Original Copy - Regional Office (Regional Director/Finance Officer)
b. Duplicate Copy & One Extra Copy - Accounting Division
c. One Copy - Office of the Project Coordinator
d. One Copy - Component Unit Concerned
e. One Copy - Collection & Disbursement Section
f. One Copy - Budget Division
g. One Copy - MOH Auditor

2. Distribution of Sub-Advice Cash Disbursement Ceiling

a. Original Copy - Cashier's Office, Regional Office
b. One Copy - Treasurer of the Philippines (NCAD)
c. One Copy - MOH Auditor
d. One Copy - Accounting Division
e. One Copy - Budget Division
f. One Copy - Disbursing Officer

II. DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS

A. At the Central Office

All components shall initiate the preparation and submission of the following:

a. Vouchers/Payrolls covering salaries, traveling expenses, honoraria, etc. claimed by components personnel with the corresponding request for Obligation of Allotment (ROA) thru FMS;

b. Any of all requests for supplies, materials and equipment (RIVs) initiated/prepared by Logistics component for the Ministers and/or his authorized representative's approval thru the recommendation of the Project/Asst. Project Coordinator;

c. In addition to a and b, Logistics Component shall initiate settlement of any or all to creditors for supplies, materials and equipment in accordance with accounting and auditing regulations;

d. The FMS shall handle all related budgetary and accounting actions on the incurrence and settlement of Project obligations;

e. All vouchers, payrolls, contracts and other documents covering the transactions of the Philippine Population Project II shall be approved in accordance with Ministry Orders Nos. 144 and 185, dated July 10, 1980 and September 17, 1980, respectively, certified correct by the respective component head.

B. At the Regional Health Office

a. Procedures for disbursement shall be made in accordance with the existing accounting rules and regulations.

III. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

A. At the Central Office

1. Schedules and reports to be prepared/consolidated by the Financial and Management Service (FMS) shall be made in accordance with Budget Circular No. 272, dated May 16, 1977 and Budget Circular No. 278, dated June 30, 1978, BC #263 and other circulars on reporting.

B. At the Regional Health Office

1. Trial Balance
2. Statement of Cash Disbursement and Obligations
3. Statement of Operations and Cash Utilization
4. Xerox copies of documents of payment to support application for loan availment to IDA.

IV. RESPONSIBILITIES

A. Regional Health Directors

The Regional Health Directors or his duly authorized representatives shall among others, establish/ensure:

1. That disbursements made in the region do not exceed sub-allotments and cash disbursement ceiling issued;

2. That deputized disbursing officer for the project are properly bonded;

3. That financial and non-financial monitoring reports are submitted regularly and promptly to the Central Office.

B. The FMS, thru the Accounting Division, shall prepare application for loan availment to IDA.

For failure to submit the required reports, no release of allotment will be made for the succeeding quarter until the reports are submitted.

This Order, issued in the interest of public service, is hereby declared official and made of record.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>