Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila
 

<date>7/6/1982</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 26, s.1982</docnum>
<subject> SUBJECT: Sanitation Requirements, Rules and Regulations and Enforcement of the Provisions of Chapter IV the Portion on "Markets" of the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines, P.D.
856.</subject>

<body>
To implement the provisions of the Chapter on Market of the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines, these rules and regulations are hereby formulated for implementation of all concerned and strict compliance of the general public.

SECTION 1. Definition of Terms:

a. market — a public place Where commodities as foodstuffs, wares, etc., may be bought or sold.

b. Market Master or Superintendent — a representative of the Treasurer: Officer-in—charge of the market where he is assigned. He has direct supervision over the employees of the market. ,

c. Stall — an open compartment or area designated for the sale of display of commodities, goods or foodstuffs.

d. Sectioning or Zoning — grouping together in one section or zone in the market the same or similar commodities, goods or foodstuffs offered for sale.

e. Aisles or Passageway — a space between rows of stalls utilized as passage by the public.

f. vendor - any person who sells goods, commodities or foodstuff, etc.

g. Stallholder — one who has been granted the right to use a stall or more. Where-he can display or sell his goods, commodities or foodstuffs.

h. Ambulant Peddler — one who sells his wares, commodities or foodstuffs in any place of the market and keeps on travelling and selling his goods from one place to another.

 

 
i. garbage depository  a temporary disposal point for refuse before being collected for final disposal

SECTION 2. Approval and Permit:

a. No market shall be established or altered until the plans for and location of the same has been approved by the Minister of Health or his duly authorized representative.

b. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or establishment to operate a market without a sanitary permit from the local health authority. This permit may be suspended or revoked by the local health authority upon violation of any provision of this Rules and Regulations. It shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed every year.


SECTION 3. Health Certificate:

	No person shall be employed in the market, who may serve food materials, foodstuffs and food without an up—to—date health certificate issued by the local health authority. This health certificate shall be renewed every year or more often as required.

SECTION 4. Prescribed Standards of Construction:

	a. Suitability of Site - the site shall be located at least 50 meters from school, religious institutions, public gathering places, public offices, etc. It shall be easily accessible to the public and conveyances or vehicles.

The site and area shall be considered in relation to future town or city development plan.

b. Building Construction — it shall be of adequate size as to allow smooth flow and convenient movement of both stallholders and customers or the public. The materials for construction shall be durable and resistant to wear and corrosion.

	l. The floor shall be of impervious material and of such construction and finish as will make it readily and thoroughly cleaned. It shall be provided with adequate slope and sufficient number of floor drains specially.in the fish, vegetable, entrails and cooked food section.

2. The walls and partitions shall be of impervious materials to a height of not less than 1.22 meters (4 ft.) from the floor, of such construction and finish as will make them easily cleaned.

3. Tables and display counters of stalls for food section, meat (entrails) section, shall be of imperv1ous materials and of such construction finish as will make them easily cleaned. It shall be likewise provided with adequate and approved table-drain and Piped-water facilities
4. Roofing - market buildings shall be provided with adequate roof which should provide vendors and customer’s protection from hazards of the elements.

c. Sectioning or Zoning — the market shall be divided into different section such as meat and meat food products, seafoods, vegetables, cooked food section, fruits, etc.

d. Stalls - every section shall be provided with stalls. Fish and meat stalls shall be elevated at least 2.5 feet from the floor.

e. Fly—proof Facilities — it is recommended that the entire-market be made fly-proof. However, if such is not possible, fly—proof facilities shall be provided to those stall where commodities being sold attracts flies

SECTION 5. Sanitation Requirements: -
a. Water Supply

1. There shall be sufficient supply of safe- potable water in the market either from the public main or from an approved source.

2. There shall be ample running water for cooked food stalls, fish and entrail stalls.

3. There shall be enough number of water pipe outlets for easy cleaning of the market and its premises.

b. Drainage Facilities:

1. There shall be sufficient drainage facilities in the market and its premises.

2. One floor drain shall be provided in every 500 sq. ft. of floor area. Slope shall not be less than an inch per foot to the drainage inlet.

a. Sewer line from toilets and urinals shall not be connected with drainage line in the market.

4. Pipe diameter for drainage purposes shall not be less than 6 inches.
5. Floor drain shall be provided with P or S traps
c. Lighting and Ventilation – there shall be adequate lighting and ventilation (natural and/or artificial) in all sections.
d. solid waste disposal – adequate number of approved type of solid waste containers shall be provided an strategically located within the market building and its premises.
e. Toilet Facilities – adequate number of toilet facilities shall be provided for each as per the following proportions:
1 water closet & urinal – for every 100 males
1 water closet – for every 50 females
     
    
      
   
 SECTION 6. Operations – 
a. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or whoever is in-charge of the market to provide the necessary personnel, equipment and supplies for cleaning and maintenance of the building and its premises 
 
b. It shall be the responsibility of the holder or vendor to keep his stall clean at all times 
c. Vendors in the food section shall provide sufficient equipment and utensils to process handle and display food materials in a clean and sanitary manner. These utensils, equipment and containers shall be sanitized after each use. -

d. All food vendors shall possess an up-to-date health certificate and clipped on the upper left front of the garment. ' . ' 1 , _ I

e. Peddlers and hawkers shall not be allowed to display and ply their trade on the market aisles and sidewalks in or around the market place. 

f. Garbage or trashes shall be temporarily stored in garbage depository and collected on time scheduled by the municipal collection system.

g. An organized insect and rodent control program shall be maintained continuously by the market owner of the market master or superintendent.

h. No obstruction of any kind shall be allowed on aisles or passageways which should not be utilized for other purposes than the smooth flow of customer.

i. Cooking shall not be allowed inside the market. However, heating food for sale in the food section may be allowed provided it will not cause nuisance to others and pose as fire hazard. The use of open fire for heating food shall not be allowed. '« .

j. Astray domestic animals shall not be allowed inside the market. Keeping of animals or fowls not intended for sale is also prohibited.

k. Market stalls or other portions of the market shall not be utilized as living or sleeping quarter. There shall be no construction of partitions, sheds or booths within the market area.

SECTION 7. Responsibility of the Local Health
Authority: 

a. Make periodical sanitary inspection to ascertain the maintenance of adequate sanitary conditions of markets and their premises..

b. Enforce the requirements of pertinent provisions of the Code on Sanitation and of its rules and regulations.

c. Supervise and control the proper care and use of market stalls.

d. Prohibit the construction of living quarters within the market and its premises.

e. Enforces the ban on construction of partitions, sheds or booths within the market area.

SECTION 8. Penal Provisions: -

The Penal Provisions provided for in the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines shall apply in this rules and regulations. 

SECTION 9. Separability and Repealing Clause: The Separability and Repealing Clauses as specified in the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines shall likewise apply in this rules and regulations.

SECTION 10. effectivity: 
   

This rules and regulations shall take of immediately.

 

</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>