
Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>4/3/1982</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>

<docnum>No. 21-A s. 1982</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT : Delegation of authority to PHO's and CHD's in Regional Health Office No. l to approve leave applications of health and hospital personnel not exceeding twenty nine (29) days subject to certain conditions effective April 1, 1982</subject>

       <body>The Regional Health Director, Region I, has submitted a proposal for delegation of authority to Provincial and City Health Officers to facilitate action on routine personnel matters at their level and thus increase their administrative efficiency and effectiveness. This will be in line with the integrated concept of health administration at provincial and city levels as envisioned under letter of implementation No. 8 dated November 1, 1972.

       In view of the successful implementation of a similar administrative experiment in Regional Health Office No. VIII, where integration of health and medical services at the implementing levels are proceeding smoothly, the establishment of a similar administrative pilot project in Region I is hereby authorized subject to the following conditions:

1. That leave applications beyond twenty-nine (29) days or an extension of leave of absence previously approved under this delegation which exceeds the said period shall as heretofore, be approved by the Regional Health Director or any duly authorized official at the regional level;

	2. That leave applications of Chiefs of Provincial and Emergency 	Hospitals, Chiefs of Clinics, Assistant Provincial and Assistant 	City Health Officers, as well as those of the Provincial and City 	Health Officers, shall as heretofore be approved by the Regional 	Health Director or any authorized official at the regional level;

3. That applications for leave of absence of officials and employees of the Mariano Marcos Memorial Hospital and of the Baguio General Hospital shall as heretofore be approved by the Regional Health Director or any duly authorized official at 	the regional level.

4. That leave applications for vacation leave of absence submitted for approval at the PHO or CHO level shall carry the statement of the head of office/chief of hospital to the effect that the services of the applicant can be spared for the period requested.

5. That where a portion of the leave of absence of a nationally paid employee is without pay, regardless of the duration thereof, such application shall, as heretofore, be approved by the Regional Health Director or any duly authorized official at the regional level so that the necessary payroll deductions can be effected promptly.

6. That no personnel with a pending formal administrative case shall be granted leave with pay during the pendency of the case. Accordingly, a certification of the immediate supervisor or by the requesting office to the effect that the applicant has no pending formal administrative case shall be included as a Supporting document to the leave application.

       7. That leave applications submitted for approval of the
Provincial or City Health Officer concerned shall always be supported by an Updated leave control form duly certified by the hospital/provincial/city health office administrative officer and noted by the chief of hospital or provincial/city health officer. Otherwise, such applications shall be returned promptly for compliance with this requirement.

	8. That requests for commutation of salary incident to leave, 	regardless of the nature or duration thereof, shall be heretofore, 	be approved by the Regional Health Director or any duly authorized 	official at the regional level;
	
	9. That applications for terminal leave of absence, regardless of 	duration, shall as heretofore, be approved by the Regional Health 	Director or any duly authorized official on the regional level;

10. That leave applications to-be approved under this Order shall bear the following words above that of the signing
       Official:

       "By authority of the Minister of Health”

 

       Provincial/City Health Officer

 	In order to strengthen the administrative expertise of the office concerned, it is important that before actual implementation of this delegation, a reconciliation of leave records at the Regional Health Office level and that of the offices and hospitals concerned be immediately undertaken. In addition, the necessary training of personnel to be utilized for the purpose, in the interest of greater accuracy, authenticity and integrity of 1eave records of employees and orientation on rulings by the Civil Service Commission shall be undertaken immediately with the assistance of the Regional Health Offices personnel.

       The Regional Health Director, Region I, shall submit a report on the results thereof not later than July 1, 1982,assessing the impact of delegation of authority on administrative efficiency, supervision and coordination of health activities at the provincial/city level of health organizations, and its effectiveness in the integration of health and medical services.

       This Order which takes effect April 1, 1982, hereby rescinds/amends any and all orders inconsistent herewith.
</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
            
