
Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila
 

<date>1/4/1982</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 22-A, s.1982</docnum>

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER


<subject>Subject : Research Policies and Guidelines in the Ministry of Health</subject>

       <body>Research activities are being undertaken in the Ministry of Health, either by the Ministry of Health personnel alone or in collaboration with foreign or local investigator alone. It is the primary responsibility of the Ministry of Health to ensure that in the conduct of these research activities more particularly, researches utilizing human subjects, the health and welfare of the public or of individuals are not endangered. For this purpose therefore the following Research Policies and Guidelines in the Ministry of Health are hereby promulgated, for the information, guidance and compliance of all concerned:

I. POLICIES :

	l. The conduct of quality researches in the field of health shall 	be given all encouragement and support.

2. Researches with foreign funding and/or in collaboration with foreign investigators shall be encouraged but subject to prior clearance with the Minister of Health. Likewise, all studies utilizing ministry of
Health facilities undertaken by researchers from local agencies alone or in collaboration with the Ministry should be cleared with the Minister of Health. However, collaborative researches with MOH Scientists shall have priority over independent researches by foreign investigators working alone.

3. The Ministry shall be furnished a copy of all the results and findings of these researches. All research collaborators, both local and foreign, shall first sign written agreements with MOH agreeing, among other things to include MPH researchers in the authorship of articles for the publication and to acknowledge all national help and assistance furnished by Philippine sources.

4. The rights of the individual shall always be respected and upheld in the conduct of any research; however in certain instances, as determined by the Minister of Health, public health interest may take precedence.

5. Priority shall be given to researches with high benefits and low risks to the subjects. All efforts must be exerted to do no harm while trying to do good. No researches shall be undertaken on termination of life.

6. Community based researches where individual consent is difficult or impossible to obtain, such as studies on treatment of water, trials on new insecticides, new prophylactic or immunizing agents, drugs for diseases of public health importance, or nutritional adjuvant or substitutes, etc. should have the approval of the Minister of Health.

7. Researches shall be started only after the protocols have been approved by a Research Committee of the Ministry of Health. An ethical review shall also be conducted by a committee appointed by the Minister of Health.

8. The specific guidelines in the conduct of biomedical researches shall be based on the Declaration of Helsinki modified in 1975.

GENERAL GUIDELINES :

1. A research protocol shall be submitted to the Research Committee of the Ministry of Health. In the case of research proposals from foreign researchers or researchers from other local agencies to be performed by them or in collaboration with the MOH, clearance from the Minister of Health must first be obtained.

2. The Research Committee shall evaluate the research protocol and experimental design within 30 days upon receipt and the proponent of the research notified shall be obtained in writing.

3. No research shall be started without the approval of the Research Committee.

4. Upon completion of the Research, copy of the resultsand findings including the final report shall be furnished the Ministry of Health.

III. GUIDELINES FOR RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS :

1. For the purpose of these guidelines research involving human subjects shall mean :

"Any study involving human subjects and directed to the advancement of biomedical knowledge that cannot be regarded as an element in established clinical management or public health practice,that involves either: (a) physical or psychological intervention or assessment or (b) generation, storage and analysis of records containing biomedical information referrable to identifiable individuals." Such studies include not only direct intervention on human subjects but also research in which environmental factors are manipulated in a way that could place incidentally exposed individuals at risk.

2. Research involving human subjects shall be conducted or carried out only by appropriately qualified and experienced investigators and in accordance with an experimental protocol clearly stating the following 

(a) the aim of the research

(b) the reason for undertaking it on human subjects
(c) the nature and degree of any known risks,

-a precise description of all proposed interventions, including intended dosages of drugs and planned duration of treatment,

-the safety of each proposed intervention and of any drug or device to be tested including the results of relevant laboratory and animal research

—the presumed benefits of participation

(d) the sources where human subjects shall be recruited.
-a statistical plan indicating the number of the subjects to be recruited and the criteria for terminating the study.

(e) the means of ensuring adequately informed consent shall be obtained in writing.
-the criteria determining the admission and withdrawal of individual subjects, including full details of the informed consent procedure.
	(f) provisions that will be made to protect confidentiality of personal data of subjects
	(g) evidence that the investigator is appropriately qualified and experienced and commands adequate facilities for the safe and efficient conduct of research

3. The protocol shall be scientifically and ethically evaluated by the Research Committee of the Ministry of Health or by a suitable review body independent of the investigators.

4. In recruitment, the principle of self-determination should be upheld in each and every human subject for study. Human subjects may be used in medical research only after they have given freely elicited signed consent and after having been adequately informed of the aims, methods, anticipated benefits and potential- hazards of the experiment and that they are free to abstain or to withdraw participation at any time.

(a) For the mentally ill, the guardian or the court can sign the informed consent. If the inclusion of patients not covered by the preceding cannot be avoided, it shall be the responsibility of the Director of the Institution to give the consent provided this official is not the actual researcher

(b) In researches which need to be conducted in children the consent of both parents or legal guardian, after a full explanation of the aims, possible hazards, inconvenience and benefits, is necessary. The consent of older children who are subjects should also be obtained.

(c) In the case where pregnant and lactating mothers are concerned, while an informed consent maybe obtained without difficulty, only such therapeutic research shall be conducted which seek to improve the health of the mother without prejudice to the fetus or nursling or to enhance the viability of the fetus or the health development of the nursling.

(d) The quality of the consent of subjects who are juniors or subordinate members of a hierarchially-structured group like medical and paramedical students, employees of pharmaceutical industry members of the Armed Forces, employees of companies and prisoners should be given very special consideration. No duress should be utilized.

e. In communities where there is a lack of adequate awareness of the inhabitants regarding the implications and benefits to society of participation in research studies, and where signing documents or consent is inherently objected to adequate information and motivation should be
done to elicit informed consent of the community‘s recommendation to resort to the decision of the trusted leaders of the community. Otherwise, substitution of sample or subjects for study should be followed to obtain the informed consent.

f. Individual consent is not necessary where community based research is to be undertaken like experimental treatment of water supplies, trials of new insecticidal, prophylactic or immunizing agents, nutritional adjuvant or substitutes, etc..but it is essential that the community particularly the leader of the community be fully informed of the study. Dissenting individuals should have the option not to participate. The decision for community participation will rest on the responsible health authority of the community.

g. If essential to study that informed consent need not be obtained, the reason for this should be clearly stated in the protocol submitted to the Research Committee/suitable review body.

5. Biomedical research involving human subjects shall be allowed only when the same has direct diagnostic or therapeutic value to the person subjected to the research, or provided that the subject volunteers after being informed of all risks and benefits.

(a) must be conducted only by scientifically qualified persons or under the supervision of a clinically competent medical person.


(b) must conform to generally accepted scientific principles/and should be based on adequately performed laboratory and animal experimentation and on a thorough knowledge of the scientific literature.

(c)there must be careful assessment of the predictable and unpredictable risks and the foreseeable benefits to the subject or others as much as possible. The welfare of the subject should prevail over the interest of science generally unless the greater good of society is involved.
In the latter case, there must be fair assurance that the research is not directly harmful to the subjects.

6. The conduct of combined medical research and professional care for the purpose of acquiring new medical knowledge shall be allowed only to the extent that medical research is justified by the potential diagnostic or therapeutic value for the patient.

(a) New diagnostic and therapeutic measures should be used only if it offers hope of saving life, reestablishing health or alleviating human suffering.

(b) Refusal of the patient to participate in a study should never interfere with the doctor-patient relationship.

7. In non-therapeutic biomedical research the subjects should be volunteers who may either be healthy persons or patients.

(a) it is the duty of the doctor to protect the life and health of the subjects. .

(b) if the research appears to be harmful to the subjects the same should be discontinued.

8. The right to compensation of human subjects of researches shall always be upheld and cannot be waived.

(a) No waiver of the right to compensation shall be valid.

(b) The consent form duly signed should include information on the nature of any possible accidental injury, the expected compensation and designated next of kin in case of death.

(c) In case of death the designated next of kin shall be entitled to the benefits due.

9. Personal data/information related to individual human subjects in the pursuit of any research studies shall be treated as confidential and disclosure to third parties without written consent of the individual involved shall not be allowed.

The Research Committee of the Ministry of Health shall be responsible for the implementation of these Research Policies and Guidelines. The Municipal Health Officers, the Provincial Health Officers, the City Health Officers and the Regional Health Directors are hereby required to report to the Minister of Health any research activity in their area of jurisdiction being undertaken in violation of these policies and guidelines.

These Research Policies and Guidelines shall be effective immediately.
 
</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>

