
Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila
 

<date>8/9/1982</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 46, s.1982</docnum>
 

<subject> Subject: Guidelines and related procedures for the construction of Barangay Health Stations provided for under Development Credit Agreement No. 923 PH (Population Project II).</subject>
 

<body>
To strengthen the Primary Health Care, Family Planning, and
Nutrition Services of the government, 915 Barangay Health Stations shall be constructed as provided under Development Credit Agreement No. 923 PH(Population Project II). For ease of reference and guidance of all concerned in the program, this Administrative Order is being issued.

1. General Guidelines

1.1 The construction of Barangay Health Stations shall be a collaborative undertaking among the Ministries of Health as lead agency, Local Government and Community Development and the local Barangay Officials.


1.2 The location of the Barangay Health Station in a municipality shall identified by the Ministry of Health thru the Rural Health Unit and Provincial Health Office based on set criteria. (See Annex)

l.3 Final site of the Barangay Health Station shall be determined by the Barangay Officials in consultation with the Municipal Health Officer and Provincial Health Officer.

l.4 Lots donated by private person or from government entity once chosen as site of-Barangay Health Station shall be the property of the Ministry of Health.
1.5 The Ministry of Health shall fund the construction thru the Provincial Hospital Cashier/Emergency Hospital Cashier who Shall disburse funds due the Barangay Council and all its creditors.

 
1.6 Construction program on a bayanihan concept shall be encouraged to ensure community participation in the construction and maintenance of the Barangay Health Station.

1.7 The Regional Health Director shall be the overall Regional Coordinator of the program while the –text missing-
  

2. Standard Procedure in the construction of Barangay Health Stations

       2.1 Pre—construction Phase -

       2.1.1 A team drawn from the membership of Primary Health Care committee, Municipal Development Council (MDC) such as MLG with. The NOH as the lead agency mainly the Rural Health Unit Staff shall be formed to handle the social preparation of the community in accordance with the guidelines set on social preparations. (See Annex A) The staff of the RHU shall be responsible for the social preparation with the support of the Municipal Development Council and the Municipal Primary Health Care Committee. 

       2.1.2 The team shall submit a report on the result of the social preparation to the Provincial Coordinator. 
       
       2.1.3 The Barangay Council shall adopt a Resolution of acceptance with a pledge of support of the construction/maintenance of the Barangay Health Station. A Memorandum of Agreement between the Municipal Primary Health Care Committee and the Barangay-Council shall be concluded specifying the mode of participation and the assistance provided by government.

 	2.1,4 approved Resolution shall be submitted by the Barangay Council to the Regional Coordinator thru the Provincial Coordinator and the Team within 10 days after adoption of the Resolution.

       2.1.5 Barangay Captain shall submit deeds of donation/ evidence of ownership to the Regional Coordinator through the Provincial Coordinator within 30 days from the acceptance of the program.

       2.1.6 The Regional Coordinator shall instruct the Civil Work Implementation Officer (CWIO) or any Civil Engineer within his jurisdiction to conduct ocular inspection and evaluation of the site and submit their evaluations within 10 days from receipt of instruction.

       2.1.7 The Regional Coordinator shall evaluate all documents and reports of the Team and the CWIO and if favorable, recommend to the Civil Works Coordinator, the inclusion of the Barangay to the program together with all supporting documents. 
       2.1.8 The Provincial Coordinator shall supervise the transfer of title of land to the Ministry of Health. 

       2.1.9 Upon receipt of the title documents relative to the site, the Project Coordinator shall transfer funds for the construction to the Provincial Hospital/Emergency Hospital in the form of funding check to the credit of the depository bank of the Provincial/Emergency Hospital advising the Provincial Coordinator and the Regional Coordinator of said transfer.

2.2 Construction Phase

2.2.1 The Provincial Coordinator shall inform the Barangay Officials thru the Municipal Primary Health Care Committee of the transfer and availability of funds to initiate construction. . .

2.2.2 Barangay officials initiate the construction and procurement of materials needed for the Barangay Health Station. The Civil Works Implementation Officer will provide technical assistance to the barangay as requested.

2.2.3 The Municipal Health Officer shall confirm actual materials used, labor and other construction accomplishments. Payment shall be in accordance with the guidelines and related procedures for accounting of funds allotted for construction of BHS, Administrative Order No. 45, s. 1987.

 
2.2.4 The CWIO and the Technical Inspector of use shall confirm the completion of the BHS before actual turnover and occupancy of the structure is authorized.

2.2.5 Construction should be completed within 45 working days after receipt by the community of construction materials and in no case should the period exceed three (3) months reckoned from date of mobilization.

2.3 Post Construction Phase

2.3.1 Provincial Hospital/Emergency Hospital Cashier shall submit report of disbursement/accomplishment to the Project Coordinator (MOH) through the Regional Coordinator upon receipt of completion report from the Municipal Primary Health Care Committee.

2.3.2 Savings realized from the excess of the funds provided by the MOH over the cost of Barangay Health Station, maybe utilized by the Barangay Council for any health related development activities with clearance from the Municipal Primary Health Care Committee.

Strict compliance with the above guidelines and procedures is enjoined of all concerned.

This Order shall take effect immediately.



</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
