  
Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila
 

<date>22/7/1982</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 37-A, s.1982</docnum>
 

<subject>Subject: Guidelines on the Appointment of Medial Specialists from the Pool of Medical Specialist II (Part-Time) positions aligned to the Office of the Minister under Batasan Pambansa 131</subject>
 
   

<body>
	Under Batasan Pambansa Blg. 131, a pool of medical specialist positions composed of 10 items of Medical Specialist II (Part-Time) has been placed under the Office of the Minister. This will be located to various teaching and training hospitals to augment their service and training capabilities. In order to maximize their effectiveness and facilitate their distribution to deserving hospitals, the following guidelines are hereby issued by this Office for the information, reference and compliance of all officials concerned:

The following priorities in the distribution of appointees—
to positions of Medical Specialist 11(Part Time) from the
pool shall be observed: 

I. Priorities
The following priorities in the distribution of appointees to positions of Medical Specialist II (Part-Time) from the pool shall be observed:

a. Medical Centers outside of Metro Manila
B. Regional Hospitals 
C. Designated Teaching and Training Provincial Hospitals

II. Procedures


1. Candidates for the items shall be proposed by any of the following units, arranged according to priority:

A. Hospital} Regional Health Office
8. Bureau of Medical Services
C. Medical Manpower Development Committee

2. Candidates recommended must be able to augment and facilitate the accreditation of the department of the receiving hospital where he will be assigned.
3.  Candidates must he Qualified for appointment to the position to be certified by the Medical Manpower Development Committee.

4. Selected candidates shall preferably me those who will eventually stay in the locality of the hospital.

5. The clinical department in the hospital where the prospective appointee shall be assigned must have the equipment and capabilities to fully utilize their skills and expertise. 
  
6. Whichever Office recommends the prospective appointee shall be expected to handle the required supporting papers necessary for processing of the appointment.

7. Upon the receipt in the office of the Minister, the appointment papers shall be referred to the Administrative Service which shall transmit them to the Medical Manpower Development Committee for screening and recommendation which shall include the following:
  
   
A. Certification or qualification of candidate to occupy a Medical Specialist position.

B. The need of the receiving hospital and its capability to utilize the skill and expertise of the prospective appointee; and

C. To monitor the assignments.

8. The papers, after being properly endorsed by the Medical Manpower Development Committee, is sent back to the Administrative Service, Office of the Minister, for final processing and signature of the Minister of Health or his designated representative.

9. The appointment shall be exempted from the review and endorsement of the Promotion Board of the Ministry of Health in accordance with the provisions of CSO Memorandum Circular No. 3-81.

10. The appointment shall be temporary in nature, subject to renewal after a period of one year.

11. The effectivity of the appointment shall be upon the signature of the Minister of Health or his duly designated representative, or upon his assumption to duty, whichever comes first.


12. The appointment shall take effect upon assumption to duty, but not earlier than the date it is signed by the Minister of Health or his duly designated representative. 

13. Upon approval by the proper authorities, the administrative Service prepares the Ministry Order assigning the new appointee to the receiving hospital based on the information given by the Medical Manpower Development Committee. 

14. The salary of the new appointee shall be paid by the Office of the Minister thru checks.
</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
