Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>May 24, 1983</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 64,s. 1983</docnum>

<subject>    SUBJECT: The Certification of Manufacturers of Processed Food for Export and Creating a Certification Committee for this purpose</subject>


<body>In the interest of the service, the following regulations are hereby promulgated for the information and guidance of all concerned, to facilitate further simplification of export procedures pursuant to ' Executive order No. 843 in relation to Presidential Decree No. 930.

        1. There shall be a Certification Committee for manufacturers of processed food products for export which shall be headed by the Director of the Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD) and composed of six—member representatives from the National Food Authority, National Science and Technology Authority, Product Standards Agency, Commission on Export Procedures, Philippine Association of Food Technologists and the Philippine Chamber of Food manufacturers. The Committee may invite representatives of other government commodity offices, such as the Philippine Coconut Authority, Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources and Bureau of Animal Industry as the need arises. It shall have the following functions:

       a. Establish guidelines for the issuance of Certificate of Compliance to BFAD's requirements on processed food products intended for export 
        b. Review the decision of BFAD on related matters brought before it for consideration;

       c. Advise BFAD in the effective implementation of the guidelines formulated by the Committee. i

       
       2. Certified manufacturers of processed food products for export shall be exempted from the need to secure the export commodity clearance.

       3. A manufacturer may apply for certification, provided it shall have met the following requirements:
       a. It.sha11 have a good record as manufacturer of processed food products for export for at least one (1) year.
       b. It shall have complied with the requirements pertaining to Good Manufacturing Practices as currently defined by the Ministry of Health and the provisions of which may be reviewed by the Committee for possible revision and consideration by the Minister of Health
              c. It shall have maintained its own laboratory facilities and personnel adequate for the purpose or should have regularly utilized the services of other reputable laboratories as long as each laboratories shall have satisfied BFAD’s requirements which would ensure product safety and quality; and
       
       d. It shall have certified that the ingredients used in the manufacture of its food products for export applied for certification are in compliance with food laws and regulations of the Philippines and/or that of the importing country.
	
	4. Prior to the issuance of the Certification, the manufacturer shall have paid the corresponding fees as shall have been determined by BFAD in consultation with the Certification Committee.

	5. The Certification shall be valid for each food product manufactured by the fire that is approved by BFAD. In case a manufacturer wishes to obtain a Certification for processed food products other than those previously approved by BFAD, it shall file the corresponding application
	6. The certification issued by BFAD shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from date of issuance, renewable for similar period of time upon payment of corresponding Certification Fee. Should BFAD find that the manufacturer has violated the terms and conditions of the Certification or that the same shall have been issued based on misrepresentations or fraudulent statements made by the manufacturer, said Certification shall be subject to cancellation with proper notice in advance to the manufacturer and to the Certification Committee. The manufacturer is given the right to appeal the decision of BFAD to the Certification Committee within ten (10) days from the recipe of the Notice of Cancellation.
	7. In cases where the manufacturer of food products may not qualify to obtain the necessary Certification mentioned above, BFAD shall continue exercising its authority to issue export commodity clearance after the usual and proper inspection of the exporter’s food products and after finding that the product’s quality is satisfactory in accordance with the food laws and regulations of the Philippines and/or that of the importing country.
	All rules and regulations, administrative orders, circulars and other administrative issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this regulation are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

 
       This Order shall take effect immediately.

      
</body>
<sign>CATALINA C. SANCHEZ</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Administrator</signtitle>
<sign>Approved: J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>



