Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>22/12/1983</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 4,s. 1983</docnum>

<subject>GUIDELINES FOR COMPLIANCE WITH A.O. NO. 64, S. 1983 RE: CERTIFICATION OF MANUFACTURERS OF FOOD PRODUCTS FOR EXPORT</subject>

<body>
 

 
	The following guidelines are hereby issued to implement the provisions of Administrative Order No. 64, s. 1983, pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 930, for the information/reference and guidance of all concerned
	Section 1. DEFINITION OF TERMS. For purposes of this guideline, the following terms in Administrative Order No. 64, s. 1983, shall mean:
	a. “Certification” shall refer to the document issued by the Administrator, Food & Drugs Administration,(Director, Bureau of Food and Drugs, BFAD)to manufacture of food products for export under conditions set forth in said order
	b. “Good record” in Section 3a of said order shall refer to the absence of record of detention/rejection by the importing country for reasons of non-conformity to established Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP).Furthermore, it hall also mean the production of consistently good quality products that conform to the rules and regulations of FDA (BFAD).
 	c. “Quality” in section 3 © of the said order shall refer not only to the requirements of exporting country.
	d. “Compliance with the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice” shall mean compliance with the provisions of Administrative Order No. 208, s. 1974 and such other relevant requirements which may be promulgated by the Minister of Health.
	e. ”Terms and Conditions of Certification” in Section 6 of Administrative Order No. 64,s. 83 shall refer to the provisions of Section 3 of the same.

Section 2. CATEGORIZATION OF FOOD PRODUCTS. The certification to be issued by BFAD shall be valid with such processed food products which have been categorized in accordance with the following classification:
	1. Canned Meat and Poultry Products
	2. Processed Meat and Poultry products preserved by other means (other than canning)
	3. Processed Milk and Cream
	4. Cheese and related cheese products
	5. Butter and Margarine
	6. Frozen Desserts
	7. Canned Fruits and Vegetables
	8. Fruit and vegetable juices, purees, concentrates and fruit flavored drinks
	9. Fruit butters, jams, jellies and preserves
	10. Fruit and vegetable Sauces
	11. Canned fish and marine products
	12. Dried and smoked fish and other marine products
	13. Fish and Shrimp Pasta (bagoong) and fish sauce
	14. Refined edible products from fats and oils
	15. Dried mixes for soups, sauces and related products
	16. Milled flour and cake mixes
	17. Breakfast cereals and Cereal based snack products
	18. Bread, cakes, pastries, pies and similar “perishable” bakery products including hopia and doughnut
	19. Biscuits, cookies, crackers, pretzels and similar “dry” bakery products
	20. Macaroni and other noodle products
	21. Chocolate and Cocoa products
	22. Candies and chewing gums
	23. Chocolate and sugar confectionery products
	24. Processed peanut and other nut products 
	25. Processed coffee and coffee products
 	26. Starch and related products
	27. Processed egg products (including balut)
	28. Flavor preparations and food colors
	29. Mayonnaise, and Salad dressings including sandwich spread
	30. Vinegar, soy sauce and other condiments
	31. Wines
	32. Malt Liquors
	33. Non-alcoholic beverage (liquid and powder mixes) and concentrates for the manufacture of the same 
	34. Bottled baby food and breast milk substitute
	35. Sweeteners and Syrups
	36. Custards and gels
	37. Pickled Fruits and vegetables
	38. Baking Powder and edible salt 
	39. Non-dairy coffee creamer
	40. Edible Fungi
	41. Banana Bits (sweetened and Salted
	
	Additional categories may be added to the list upon proper application of the manufacturers and approval by the Administrator, Food and Drug Administration (Director, BFAD). The Approved product categories shall be so indicated in the certification issued by FDA (BFAD).
	A manufacturer having been issued a certification for certain product categories and who may subsequently wish to include other product categories may petition for amendment of his Certification. Such amendment may be instituted upon compliance with FDA, (BFAD) requirements.
	Section 3. APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATION SCHEME. Any FDA (BFAD) licensed manufacturer of processed food products for export may apply for certification with the FDA (BFAD) by accomplishing, in duplicate, the prescribed forms or the purpose, namely: Food Manufacturer Information Sheet and Product Information Sheet, herein referred to as FDA (BFAD) FORM NOS. A-1 and A-2, respectively, and a copy of each is attached hereto.
	Section 4. ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATION. Upon receipt of duly accomplished Application forms FDA (BFAD)shall issue the Certification, upon payment of fees prescribed in Section 6 hereof within a period of thirty (30) working days. However, this period may be extended depending on the exigencies of the situation.
	Section 5. VALIDITY OF CERTIFICATION. Certification shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance, subject to yearly renewal upon payment of corresponding fee. Said certification shall be subject to suspension/recall should any of the conditions set forth in A.O. 64 s. 1983 be violated.
	Section 6. FEES. The annual certification fee to be collected by FDA (BFAD) shall be P500.00 per product category a enumerated in Section 2 hereof but not to exceed P2,000.00 per manufacturer
	Laboratory Analysis Fee. A fee od P50.00 shall be charged for every product collected periodically which should not exceed four (4) times a year by FDA (BFAD) inspectors for laboratory examination and analysis.
	Section 7. This Order shall take effect immediately. 
</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
