Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>11/7/1983</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 65,s. 1983</docnum>

<subject>REORGANIZATION OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH</subject>

<body>

 Pursuant to Executive Order No. 851, reorganizing the Ministry of Health, the following guidelines are hereby issued for the documentation of the reorganization of the Ministry of Health:

Section 1. Health Education and Manpower Development serving

	1. The Health Education and Manpower Development Service shall assume the function of the Office of Health Education and personal training and those of the Medical Manpower Development Committee, both of which have been abolished

	
       2. The new Service shall be responsible for providing the necessary staff Support in the implementation of the Rural Health Practice Program.
       3. Flt shall absorb applicable functions, appropriation, records, equipment property and such personnel as may be necessary of the abolished units

       Section 2. Bureau of Food and Drugs

1. The newly Created Bureau of Food and Drugs shall assume the functions of the Food and Drug Administration which has been abolished. The functions to be assumed by the Bureau shall not include those previous functions of the Narcotic Drugs Division of the Food and Drug Administration which have already been assumed by the Dangerous Drugs Board.

       2. The Bureau shall also have the authority to prescribe general standards and guidelines with respect to the veracity of nutritional and medicinal claims in the advertisement of food, drugs and narcotics in the various media, to monitor such advertisements, and to call upon any erring manufacturer, distributor, or advertiser to desist from such inaccurate or misleading nutritional or medicinal claims in their advertising. Should such manufacturer, distributor, or advertiser refuse or fail to obey the desistance order issued by the Bureau, he shall be subject to applicable penalties as may be prescribed by law and regulations
	
 	Section 3. Bureau of Quarantine
	1. The Bureau of quarantine, a line bureau, shall continue to perform its present functions, including supervision over rat-proof zones in designated international ports and airports over medical examination of aliens for immigration purposes and medicinal claims in the advertisement of food, drugs and cosmetics in the various media, to monitor such advertisements, and to call upon any erring manufacturer, distributor, or advertiser to desist from such inaccurate or misleading nutritional or medicinal claims in their advertising. Should such manufacturer, or advertiser refuse or fail to obey the desistance order issued by the Bureau, he shall be subject to applicable penalties as may be prescribed by law and regulations“

Section 3. Bureau of Quarantine

       1. The Bureau of Quarantine, a line bureau shall continue to perform its present functions, including supervision over rat-proof zones in designated international ports and airports and over medical examination of aliens for immigration purposes

       2. The function of the Ministry regarding supervision over the sanitation of interisland vessels may be exercised by the Ministry through such of its field offices or the Bureau of Quarantine as it may indicate.

Section 4. Line Functions in the National Capital Region
       1. The following staff bureaus and special projects may, operating through the Minister, directly exercise line functions in the Nationa1 Capital Region only for as long as the regional office of the Ministry for the National Capital Region has not been established

a. Bureau of Dental Health Services
b. Bureau of Food and Drugs
0. Bureau of Health services
d. Bureau of Medical Services
e. Bureau of Research and laboratories
f. Cancer Control Center
g. Dermatology Research and Training Service
h. Family Planning service
i. Malaria Eradication Service
3. Nutrition Services
k. Radiological Health Service
l. Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service

Section 5. Medical Centers, Hospitals and Research Institute
1. The Minister of Health shall exercise supervision use Control over the following medical centers, hospitals, and research institute

a. Jose H. Reyes Memorial Medical Center
b. Rizal Medical Center
c. Ospital ng Bagong Lipunan
d. Jose Fabella Memorial Hospital
e. National Children's Hospital
f.} National Mental Hospital

g. National Orthopedic Hospital

h. Quirino Memorial General Hospital
i. San Lazaro Hospital
j. Research Institute for Tropical Medicine


       2. Medical centers and regional hospitals which are not listed above and which are located outside of Metro Manila shall be under the supervision and control of the appropriate regional –text missing-

Section 6. Administrative Supervision

1. The Minister shall exercise administrative entities:
the following entities

a. Dangerous Drugs Board
b. Philippine Medical Care Commission.
c. Schistosomiasis Control Council

Section 7. Attached Corporation

1. The Tondo Medical Center shall be attached to the Ministry; for policy and program Coordination.

Section 8. Regional Health Offices

1. The Regional Health Office shall have supervision and control over the following;

a. Regional Hospital
b. Medical Center(s) in the region
c. Provincial health offices

2. The line functions of the Family Planning service, the
Malaria Eradication Service, the Nutrition Service, and the Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service shell be integrated into
The appropriate Regional Health Office, including applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary

Sectioh.9. Regional Hospitals

1. The Regional Hospital shall have, as part of its integrated facilities, such regional laboratories and regional mental hospitals may exist in the region subject to the following provision: the Regional Laboratory shall be transferred to and be made part of the Regional Hospital or the Medical Center in the Region, whichever is nearer in location, including applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property, an such personnel as may be necessary.

Section 10. Provincial Health Offices

1.The Provincial Health Office and the Provincial Hospital shall be merged to constitute a new Provincial Health Office. The new provincial Health Office shall be responsible for the complete integration of the promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative components of health care delivery within the province provided by the national government.

2. The new Provincial Health Office shall perform the following functions:
a. Administer and coordinate all health and medical activities in the province;

b. Exercise supervision and control over the district hospitals and other field units in the province, except those placed directly under the Office of the Office of the Regional Health Office.
	

c. Maintain and operate a health information system for financial planning and management

d. Coordinate with local government unit within the provision;

e. Exercise financial management over resources allocated to the province by the Office of Budget and Management, the Office of the Minister, or the Regional Health Office in accordance with approved plans, subject to existing accounting and auditing regulations; and

f. Perform such other functions as may be provided by law or expressly delegated by higher authority.

3. The functions of the Family Planning Service, Malaria eradication Service, Nutrition Service, and the Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service, insofar as they pertain to field operations, shall be integrated into the Provincial Health Office. The integration shall include applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary.

4. The Provincial Hospital shall serve as the site of the integrated Provincial Health office.

5. The size of the Financial and Administrative staff of the new Provincial Health Office shall depend on the number of field positions integrated at the provincial level as well as the bed capacity of the provincial hospital

       Section 11. Functions or the Integrated District Hospitals

	1. The District Hospital shall be the implementing unit for the integration of health and medical services in its area. It shall exercise supervision and Control over health and medical services undertaken there. 

	2 The rural health un1ts.end specialized field units, in addition to their present functions, shall serve as the out-patient services of the district hospitals in their catchment areas
	3. The barangay health stations shall constitute the extension of the rural health center. 
	4. The size of the administrative staff of the District Hospital shall depend on the number of field position integrated there in as well as the bed capacity of the District Hospital.
	5. For service coverage, the ten-bed municipal hospitals shall be considered district hospitals.
	Section 12. Staffing Patterns 
 
1. Upon approval of the new staffing patterns, appointment shall be issued in accordance with the following guidelines:

a. Appointments to positions in the staffing patterns shall, in general, be in accordance with the merit requirements of the Civil Service law and rules and duly approved qualification standards for each position; provided, that in the case of new position titles, qualification standards therefor shall be developed by the Ministry, subject to the approval by the Civil Service Commission; provided further; that consideration for employment of persons other than those of the agencies and offices affected by this implementation shall have been considered; provided finally, that personnel actions which need to be taken shall be in accordance with applicable civil service law and rules.

b. Appointment to senior supervisory positions in the field health services which are outside of the scope of the career executive service shall be made on a general basis and placed under the Office of the Minister. Initially, this will cover positions of Provincial and assistant Provincial Health Officers, City and Assistant City wealth Officers and Chiefs of Medical Centers and Regional Hospitals.

c. After issuing appointments on a general basis to officials, the Minister shall indicate, through administrative issuances, the specific assignments of appointees seen no to particular geographical location or specific hospital in order to expand their managerial effectiveness or avail of their expertise.
d. The appointment of chiefs of District Hospitals shall likewise be made on a general basis and placed under the office of the Provincial Health Officer. Their specific assignments shall be made by the Regional Health Office upon recommendation of the Provincial Health Officer concerned.
e. The Minister, or his duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized to rotate or re-assign them when deemed necessary in the interest of the public interest.
f. All other cases not covered by the preceding guidelines shall be considered as separation from the service and the personnel concerned shall be entitled to all benefits provided under existing laws, rules and regulations, subject to availability of funds from appropriate sources

 Section 13. Budget Levels

     
All actions herein mandated shall be guided by the current level and expenditure breakdowns, ministry-wide.

Section14. Effectivity
This Order shall take effect immediately

 

</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>

