Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>15/3/1984</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 85-A, s. 1984</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Deferment of the one year post-residency service of graduate residents as embodied in Administrative Order No. 10 s. 1981 dated September 30, 1981 provided by Administrative Order No. 60 s. 1979 and Revision of the Medical Manpower Development Program.</subject>

 <body>
	Effective April 1, 1984, the provisions of Post-Residency Service shall be deferred, and its stead Residency service for a period of 6 months within the fourth year, or last year of residency, shall be implemented.
	The none year post-residency service of graduate residents under P.D. 1424 as implemented under the Administrative Order No. 60 s. 1979 is hereby deferred until further notice. All ministry Orders pertaining to post-residency assignments previously issued shall stand in effect and should be followed for the interest of the service.
	Definition: 6 months Residency Service is the latter 6 months of training in a specialty program designed to complete his acquired skills and develop new experience in a second Teaching and Training Hospital and also to augment or complement the training program of the receiving hospital.

	Henceforth, all Chiefs of Hospitals with accredited teaching and training programs shall give more emphasis and direction in the implementation of residency service, outside the original training hospital for a period of 6 months, within the fourth year or the last year of residency program. The following guidelines shall be observed to ensure strict implementation of the 6 months residency service.

1. The Chiefs of Hospitals are required to submit to the Medical Manpower Development Committee through the Regional Directors the names of all residents in their last two years of residency with the dates of their last appointment, the field of training and suggested place, if any, for the 6 months service assignment. This list must be submitted during the first month of the last two years of training of the residents.

2. The Chiefs of Hospitals are to submit not later than December 31 and July 31 of each year the current roster of medical staff
(Medical Specialists, Senior Residents and all other Training Residents) including all vacant items by department, including the plantilla number as prepared by the Personnel Officer and
Approved by the Chief of Hospital

3. To eliminate, in effect, the problem of unavailability of vacant items, the graduating resident shall be detailed for 6 months to a receiving Ministry of Health hospital that needs the particular trained manpower. The fully-trained physicians serving his 6-months Residency Service term is expected to complement and further upgrade his capability and skill of the clinical department he is assigned to.

4. The Chief of the Hospital where the graduating resident served his 6 months residency service shall send certification of completion of the 6 months service to the Medical Manpower Development Committee for recording, monitoring and eventual issuance of Certificate (Part V, No. l of the Administrative Order No. 60 s. 1979).

 

5. Non-compliance to Residency Service by the resident as required by the Ministry of Health, constitute a violation and therefore requires penalty as embodied in the penalty clause Part VI of the
Administrative Order No. s. l979 with the additional Specific penalties of: A. Bar the non-complying resident from any government service in the Ministry of Health for 5 years. B. Bar the same from leaving the country for whatever reasons for 5 years. The sanctions may be lifted upon the resident's subsequent compliance to the service required by the Ministry of Health.

       Upon assignment by the Ministry of Health, the resident in detail shall proceed to the place of assignment promptly. Training allowance shall be borne by the receiving hospital while the salary shall be forwarded by the sending hospital upon receipt of the certificate of attendance.

  
  

</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
 

