Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>8/7/1985</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>122, s. 1985</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Administrative and Organizational Arrangement and Assignment of Functions and Responsibilities for the Implementation of the CRT Component of the Primary Health Care Financing Project of the Ministry of Health.</subject>


<body>
Pursuant to the provisions of Amendment No. 2 to Project Agreement No. 492—037], Primary Health Care Financing Project, the following designations/assignments are hereby made:

1.0 Designation of the Bureau of Health Services (BHS) as the coordinating office of the ORT Project
       The Bureau of Health Services (BHS) will coordinate all ORT Project implementation activities with the BHS Director designated as the ex-officio Project Coordinator of the OPT Component of the PHC Financing Project.

2.0 Constitution of an ORT Project Monitoring Staff (Secretariat)
       To enable the BHS to effectively coordinate and manage the various activities of the URI Project, a full time Project Monitoring Staff is hereby created composed of the following:
       Dr. Aurora Villarosa — Project Coordinator Director, BHS
       Dr. Teresa Nano - Assistant Project Coordinator OIC, Planning Service
       Ms. Enriqueta Sullesta- Coordinator PMS Secretariat Nursing Program Supervisor, BHS
       Ms. Norma Escobido - Administrative Assistant Health Educator, HEMDS
       Ms. Florentina Tanedo — Statistical/Clerical Support Statistician II, BHS
       Mr. Reynaldo Reyes - IEC/Clerical Support Illustrator I, HIS

 	The members of the PMS as constituted shall come from the existing personnel of the Ministry of Health. The members of the PMS shall draw their own salaries from their Bureaus/Offices/Units. Additional personnel for the PMS may subsequently be hired, to be paid from out of the project funds, for purposes.of projedt execution, monitoring and evaluation as the need therefore may arise. 

       The Project Monitoring Staff shall hold office at the Bureau of Health Services.

       The Project Monitoring Staff shall, in addition to its regular duties and special assignments, discharge and perform the following duties, functions and responsibilities:
       2.1 Integrate, consolidate and coordinate the various ORT project activities and closely monitor their implementation by the various units of MOH, ensuring timeliness in meeting targets, commitments, scheduled completion dates and other related project management objectives.

2.2 Prepare ORT project implementation plans, work/financial plans and related technical and financial reports for submission to appropriate offices.

2.3 Provide advice and assistance to field service units in the implementation of ORT project activities.

2.4 Ensure that MOH units concerned are provided with the needed resources to enable them to perform assigned responsibilities.

2.5 Serve as the liaison office with USAID and prepare reports and documents specified in the Project Agreement.

	In the performance of the assigned functions and responsibilities, the ORT Project Monitoring Staff is authorized to call on officials, bureaus, offices. or units of the Ministry of Health to obtain information or data necessary to carry out its job assignments in the ORT Project. If necessary, the PMS.is authorized to contract services to carry out the implementation of any particular ORT project activity.
The PMS is also authorized to make field visits as often as necessary, expenses of which are chargeable against project funds, subject to the usual accounting and auditing requirements.

3.0 Designation of the Functions and Responsibilities of the Various MOH Offices Participating in the Implementation of the ORT Project.

The following administrative and organizational arrangements and assignment of functions and responsibilities of the various units and offices of the MOM involved in the implementation of the
ORT Project are hereby made:

National CDD Committee. The existing National CDD Committee composed of the following:

a. Minister of Health, Chairman
b. Deputy Minister of Health, Vice-Chairman

c. Director, Bureau of Health Services, Member

d. Director, Bureau of Medical Services, Member

e. Director, Bureau of Research and Laboratories, Member
f. Director, Research Institute for Tropical Medicine, Member
g. Director, Nutrition Service, Member
h. Chief, Health Education and Manpower Development Services, Member
i. Chief, Health Intelligence Service, Member
j. Chief, San Lazaro Hospital, Member
k. Chief, Planning Service, Member


shall continue to operate and shall be responsible for:

a. establishment of priorities and providing direction to the ORT project.
b. approval of ORT project plans
c. setting of ORT project policies

3.2 CDD Task Force. The CDD Task Force composed of representatives of the various offices constituting the National CDD Committee will continue to operate and will be responsible for the translation of policies into operational guidelines and will provide staff assistance to the National CDD Committee.

3.3 Bureau of Health Services. The Bureau of Health Services will coordinate all ORT project implementation activities.

3.4 San Lazaro Hospital. The San Lazaro Hospital shall be responsible for the organization and Management of the National Rehydration Training Center (NRTC).

3.5 Health Education and Manpower Development Services. HEMDS shall be responsible for the IEC and promotional activities for professionals, paraprofessionals and consumers.

3.6 Bureau of Research and Laboratories. The BRL shall be responsible for the continuous supply of the Oresol requirements of the Ministry.
3.7 Planning Service. Planning Service. Planning Service shall be responsible for the periodic evaluation of the ORT project.

3.8 Health Intelligence Service. Health Intelligence Service shall be responsible for the collection, processing and analysis of ORT project reports.

3.9 Central Supply Section. Central Supply Section shall be responsible for the procurement of MOH ORS supplies and distribution of the same including Oresol to the Regional Health Offices.

3.10 Regional Health Offices. The RHOs shall be responsible for the proper implementation of the project in the region.

3.11 Field Services (Provincial, District, Barangay Levels. Field service units shall be responsible for the proper implementation of the project

	The Director/Chief or Head of the Bureau/Offices/Units mentioned above shall be responsible for carrying out their respective responsibilities.

   

This order, shall take effect immediately.

</body>  
<sign>J.C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health </signtitle>
