Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>27/5/1985</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>116-B, s. 1985</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Implementation of Sections 4, and 8 of Executive Order No. 851, creating the Bureau of Food and Drugs which shall assume the functions of the abolished Food and Drug Administration.</subject>

<body>
       Pursuant Ito Section 4 and 8 of Executive Order No. 851 dated
December 2, 1982 the Food and Drug Administration was abolished and in 1ieu thereof the Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD) was created.


For purposes of implementing the above stated provisions of the said Executive Order, for the informat1on and guidance of all concerned, this Adm1n1strat11e Order is being issued to effect:
- organization of the Bureau of Food and Drugs; and
- definition of its functions
SECTION – Organization of the Bureau of Food and Drugs
 The Bureau shall be headed By a Director who shall be assisted by an Assistant Director. The organizational structure is reflected in the Organizational Chart attached hereto as Annex A.

  It shall have the following major organizational units:
1.1 Office of the Director/Assistant Director
1.1.1 Director
1.1.2 Assistant Director

1.2 Product Evaluation Division
1.2.1 Product Evaluation Section
1.2.2 Product Registration Section
1.2.3 Product Advertisement Section
1.2.4 Adverse Drug Reaction Section

1.3 Regulation Division
1.3.1 Inspection Section
1.3.2 Licensing Section
1.3.3 Import and Export Section

1.4 Laboratory Division
1.4.1 Physico-chemical Section
1.4.2 Microbiological Section
1.4.3 Toxicology Section

1.5 Administrative Division
1.5.1 Planning and Budget Section
1.5.2 Personnel Section
1.5.3 Supply and Property Section
1.5.4 Cash Collection and Disbursement Section
1.5.5 Accounting Section 
1.5.6 Central Record Section

1.6 Technical Supervision
	Food and Drug Services under the Regional Health Offices including Integrated Provincial Health Offices.
1.7 Creation of Ad Hoc Committees on Food and Drugs based on Specialization from the various sectors as the need arises.

Section 2. Functions of the Bureau of Food and Drugs
	The Bureau shall assume the functions of the abolished Food and Drug Administration.
  2.1 General Functions:
	The Bureau as a regulatory agency whose activities shall be consistent with the goals and objectives of the Ministry of Health shall undertake the following functions:
	a. Provide consultative and advisory services to the Minister of Health on matters pertaining to food, drugs including traditional medicine, device, cosmetic and household products containing hazardous substances;
	b. Develop and recommend policies, regulations and standards in accordance with Republic Act No. 3720 (Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act) RA 5921 and other pertinent laws and regulations for approval of the Minister of Health;
	c. Coordinate with the Regional Health Offices in the technical supervision of the enforcement of the same laws and its implementing rules and regulations;
	d. Administer and execute the implementation of the policies, rules, regulations and standards approved by the Minister in accordance with the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (RA 3720) Decree on Hazardous Substances (PD 881) RA 5921 and other pertinent laws;
	e. Conduct the evaluation and registration of products as well as the development of a system in monitoring adverse drug reactions;
	f. Conduct inspectional, investigational, sample collection, surveillance programs, seizure and condemnation of product that is adulterated, misbranded or counterfeited;
	g. Issue licenses for the operation of establishments dealing with products within its jurisdiction;
	h. Undertake testing of products to determine compliance with standards of identity, purity, quality and fill of containers;
	i. Fix the rates of and levy, assess and collect fees for the licensing of establishments, testing and/or registration of products;
	j. Recommend institution of criminal action and administrative sanction for violation of the laws and it implementing rule and regulations;
	k. Prescribe general standards and guidelines with respect to the veracity of nutritional and medicinal claims in the advertisement of food, drugs and cosmetics in the various media, to monitor such advertisement of food, drugs and cosmetics in the various media, to monitor such advertisements and to call upon any erring manufacturers, distributor and advertiser to desist from such inaccurate nutritional or medicinal claims in their advertising.
	l. Conduct and/or support research and related activities to obtain necessary information;
	m. Develop and implement broad program to promote voluntary compliance and cooperation between the consuming public, the regulated industries, multi-dimensional professional groups through educational and informational activities;
	n. Develop guidelines on emergency preparedness in time of poison outbreaks, national recalls, etc, in coordination with field personnel;
	o. Conduct continuing manpower development program in coordination with the Health Education and Manpower Development Service of the Ministry; and
	p. Perform such other functions as may be provided by law or assigned by the Minister

2.2 Functions of the Major Organizational Units:
	2.2.1 Office of the Director
	The Office of the Director shall provide consultative/advisory services and act as the administrative and executive are of the Minister of Health on matters pertinent to food, drug, including traditional medicine, cosmetic, device and household products containing hazardous substances. It shall develop and recommend policies, rules, regulations and standards in accordance with Republic Act No. 3720, P.D. 881, R.A. 5921, R.A. 6425 and other pertinent laws and regulations. It shall further coordinate with the Regional Health Offices in the technical supervision of the personnel thereat in connection with the implementation of aforestated functions.
	It shall plan, direct, coordinate and evaluate the over-all administrative, technical, legal and public affairs operation of the Bureau and shall perform other functions as may be provided by law or assigned by the Minister.

FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTOR
a. To advise and assist the Minister in the promulgation of rules and regulations relative to matters under the jurisdiction of the Bureau Food and Drugs; 
b. To establish and recommend policies and standards for the operation of the Bureau pursuant to the Minister’s health programs;
c. To advise and recommend to the Minister appropriate legal actions on matters pertaining to the enforcement of RA 3720, PD 881, RA 5921 and other pertinent laws and its implementing Orders, rules and regulations;
d. To implement broad programs to promote voluntary compliance and cooperation between the consumers, regulated industries, multi-dimensional professional groups and other concerned organizations and the Bureau through educational and informational activities.
e. To coordinate the programs and projects of the Bureau with related agencies and to be responsible for its economical, efficient and effective administration; and
f. Perform such other functions as may be provided by law or assigned by the Minister.

FUNCTIONS OF THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
a. To advise and assist the Director in the formulation and implementation of the Bureau’s objectives and policies;
b. To assist the Director in coordinating the programs and projects of the Bureau; and 
c. To perform such other functions as may be provided by law or assigned by the Director

2.2.2 Product Evaluation Division
	Responsible for evaluation of food, drug, traditional medicine, device, cosmetic and household products containing hazardous substance and the registration of the same in compliance with the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, Decree on Hazardous Substances and other laws. Monitor and check the veracity of claims in advertisement of products and set-up a system for monitoring adverse drug reaction.
	a. Conduct evaluation of all products under BFAD jurisdictions;
	b. Conduct pharmacological evaluation of investigational drug claims and new drug applications;
	c. Undertake pharmacokinetic and bioequivalent studies on commonly used drug in the country; 
	d. Evaluate the program on drug evaluation and control;	
	e. Establish standard for the registration of all products under BFAD jurisdiction;
	f. Review and process application for the registration of all products under BFAD jurisdiction;
	g. Establish general standards and guidelines with respect to the veracity of nutritional and medicinal claims in the advertisement of food, drug and cosmetic in the various mass media, monitor such advertisement and require compliance with regulation subject to applicable penalties prescribed by law; 
	h. Undertake exchange of technical information on new drug and serious adverse drug reactions among ASEAN countries.
	i. Monitor adverse drug reactions and toxicity of products under BFAD jurisdiction for use in the formulation of regulations and standards in coordination with field personnel;
	j. Develop and Conduct research program on evaluation and registration of products;
	k. Undertake technical training programs for personnel in coordination with the Manpower Development Office of the Ministry of Health; and
	l. Perform other related functions as directed by the Office of the Director.

2.2.3 Regulation Division
	Plan, direct and supervise the implementation of rules, regulations and standard operating procedures in inspection and licensing of establishments within BFAD jurisdiction.
	a. Translate policy statement into action guidelines and execute compliance activities in the inspection and licensing of establishments dealing with products within BFAD jurisdiction;
	b. Conduct inspection of establishments in conformity with rules and regulations in the licensing of establishments dealing with products within BFAD jurisdiction;
	c. Review, evaluate and recommend approval of applications of license to operate of establishments dealing with products within the BFAD jurisdiction;
	d. Issue original and renewal of licenses to operate of establishments dealing with products within BFAD jurisdiction;
	e. Conduct seizure and condemnation of any products under BFAD jurisdiction that is adulterated, misbranded and counterfeited;
	f. Obtain data on adverse drug reaction from different sources;
	g. Monitor emergency activities such as in time of poison outbreaks, national recalls, disasters, etc., and recommend immediate action;
	h. Appear in investigational hearing on cases of violations;
	i. Identify program objectives and problem areas in inspection and licensing of establishments by maintaining contact with industries and consumers to promote cooperation to encourage compliance with laws;
	j. Consolidate and prepare all statistical data pertaining to inspection and licensing of establishments and maintain a complete list of licensed establishments;
	k. Assist in the preparation of training programs for technical personnel;
	l. Prepare and submit the necessary report of activities of the division; and 
	m. Perform other related functions that may be assigned from time to time by the Director.

2.2.4 Laboratory Division
	Plan, direct and supervise the implementation of rules, regulations and standard operating procedures in the laboratory testing of products for identity, purity, quality and fill of container, and prepares certificate of compliance or non-compliance.
	a. Translate policy statements into action guidelines and execute compliance activities in the testing of products within the BFAD jurisdiction;
	b. Conduct necessary tests of products for identity, purity and fill of container;
	c. Evaluate results of laboratory tests of products for the preparation of certificate of compliance or non-compliance;
	d. Certify batches of antibiotics and antibiotic preparations for compliance with established standards;
	e. Appear in investigational hearing on violative products;
	f. Conduct systemic scientific research and studies, including long range research to solve consumer protection problems and to develop better analytical methods for use in product testing;
	g. Assist the industries in voluntary compliance with laws and setting up controls to prevent violations;
	h. Prepare and submit the necessary report of activities of the Division;
	i. Assist in the preparation of training programs for technical personnel; and
	j. perform other related functions that may be assigned from time to time by the Director.

2.2.5 Administrative Division
	The Administrative Division shall perform the following functions:
a. Develop and recommend the short/long range plans and budget estimates of the Bureau.
b. Provide the Bureau with general administrative support services related to:
	1. Personnel recruitment, training and development;
	2. Records and property management;
	3. Cash collection and disbursement;
	4. Accounting;
	5. Communication and transportation; and 
	6. Other general maintenance services.

c. Perform other related functions as may be assigned by the Director.
SECTION 3. Any orders, rules, and regulations or administrative issuances or any provision or part thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby repealed and/or modified accordingly.
SECTION 4. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>  
<sign>J.C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
