Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>9/7/1986</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 14-A s. 1986</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Revised and procedures and deliveries of foodstuffs to the hospitals and San1taria of the Ministry of Hea1th</subject>

<body>

The purpose of this Order is to set up policies and procedures that will ascertain the qua1ity of foodstuffs de1ivered to the different hospita1s and Sanitaria under this Ministry and to guarantee the performance of the contracted supp11ers.

1, DEFINITIONS OF TENNS

 

A. REJECTION - is refusa1 to accept deliveries based on the
following:
1. Items delivered are Not fit for human consumption.
2. Items delivered are not inc1uded in the offic1a1 price list.
3. De11very of items is not affected within the prescribed time and there is no need for them anymore.

B. SHORT DELIVERY – is when the items delivered are acceptable but do not meet the weight or quant1ty as per delivery Order slip.

 

C. BELOW SPECIFICATION — is when the items delivered do not meet the standard spec1f1cations as per official price list or when items de11vered are not the items ordered but Nith1n the contract.

D. FROZEN — is when the items de11Nered are p1aced under ice.
In the case Of fish, the following are characteristics of fresh fish:

1. odor is not sta1e or tainted
2. f1esh adheres strong1y to backbone, firm and e1astic and does not retain imprint of fingers

3. eyes are bright and gills are red.

4. sinks in water 
In the case of meat and poultry, the characteristics of freshness are:
Poultry:
1. Odor is not stale or tainted
2. No discoloration

Meat (Pork and Beef): 
1. odor is not stale or tainted
2. no discoloration
3. fine fiber
4. in case of cow’s beef, fat should be yellowish
5. in case of carabeef, fat is white


E. LATE DELIVERY – is delivery affected after the lapse of prescribed time. The prescribed time of delivery in the case of pandesal and cream bread is not later than 5:00am; meat and fish not later than 7:00 am; and for all deliveries of other items not later than 10:00am, unless otherwise requested by the Hospital concerned.

F. NON-DELIVERY is when items called for are not delivered at all.

G. UBSITTUTION – delivery of different items from what are ordered. Delivery for different items not within the contract is not allowed. However, delivery of items within the contract allied to the item ordered may be allowed provided, that a written request by the Supplier is submitted to and accepted by the Hospital concerned within 24 hours before delivery is effected. Provided further that if no written request has been received the corresponding penalty for below-specification shall be imposed.

H. DEFAULTING DEALER – is one who fails to comply with his obligations under the contract.

II. PENALTIES TO BE IMPOED.

A. REJECTION – 15% of the total value of the rejected portion
B. SHORT DELIVERY – 10% of the value of deficiency
C. BELOW-SPECIFICATION - 5% of the value of the whole delivery or of the portion thereof as the case maybe
D. FROZEN ITEMS – 5% of the value of the whole delivery or of the portion thereof as the case may be
E. LATE DELIVERY – 10% of the value of the whole delivery or of the portion thereof as the case may be
F. NON-DELIVERY – 20% of the total value of the undelivered items
	Should the hospital resort to open market purchase, for the whole or portion of the items undelivered or rejected, the difference in cost including transportation expenses shall be charged against the defaulting supplier
	More than one penalty may be imposed on one particular delivery

III. MISCELLANEOUS.
1. Dealers are strictly prohibited from entrusting to the custody of hospital personnel their bank invoices and from preparing their invoices within the hospital vicinity.
2. The menu for the day shall be posted in the Bulletin Board of the hospital

3. Dietary Order Slips shall be prepared and distributed accordingly at least one week in advance.
4. Delivery accepted shall only be in the quantity/volume ordered. Advance delivery may be allowed in the exigency of the service upon the approval by the Chief of Hospital.
5. Defaulting suppliers shall be reported within seven days from the occurrence of the violation by the Chief of Hospital to the Committee on Foodstuffs for proper action
6. All deliveries shall be covered by duly prepared invoices
7. All hospitals are enjoined to submit a monthly report of the performance of the contracted suppliers including utilization of the items procured
Orders or circulars issued by this Ministry inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
This order issued in the interest of the service is hereby declared official and made of record.
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D. </sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
