 Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>21/1/1986</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 144 s. 1986</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Funding of the Schistosomiasis Hospital and the Schistosomiasis Research Training Division in Palo, Leyte.</subject>

<body>

   
  
The Schistosomiasis Hospital and the Schistosomiasis Research Training Division in Palo, Leyte both projects under the Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service, shall be funded as follows:

       The Director of the SCRS shall request for the obligation of allotments thru the ROA covering the amount to be allocated for the operation of both projects for the quarter. The cash corresponding to the funds allocated shall be remitted to the hospital on a monthly basis. The Director, SchistcsomiaS1s Control and Research Service shall make representations with the PNB to facilitate the transfer of the deposit from Manila to PNB, Palo, Leyte, for credit to the account current of SCRS.
However, the initial funding shall be given to the Regional Health Director, Regional Health Office No. 8 for the Opening of the current account, the account number of which shall be relayed to the Director of the SCRS and the Chief, Financial and Management Service. The Chief, FMS, shall advise the hospital of the amount allocated to guide them in incurring expenses indicating the obligation number. Accountable officers shall be designated and properly bonded. Only one account shall be maintained and one disbursing officer assigned to handle the expenses for operation of both Schistosomiasis Hospital and Schistosomiasis Research Training Division. Upon deposit of the initial check or upon notification by the FMS of the fund transfer and/or receipt of the credit memo from the local PNB for a subsequent fund transfers, the Schistosomiasis Hospital and Schistosomiasis Research and Training Division may avail of the amount thru the issuance of PNB checks. Disbursements shall be approved by the Regional Health Director. Other signing officials shall likewise be designated.
 Funds shall be certified as to availability by the accountant of the hospital before any disbursements is made. The hospital accountants shall maintain a control of the allocated amounts and shall see to it that expenses are within the limits of the funds in accordance with the planned objectives. In processing the disbursement vouchers/payrolls, he shall indicate the obligation number furnished by the FMS against which the expense is charged. Prevailing accounting and auditing rules and regulations shall be observed in the disbursement of funds.
	The appointed/designated disbursing officer of the hospital shall maintain a checkbook of for the account. A check in favor of the disbursing officer is to be issued to cover salaries of personnel of the Schistosomiasis Hopia and the Schistosomiasis Research Training Division. Report of disbursements covering general payrolls for salaries shall be submitted every quincena in two copies with the disbursement vouchers/payrolls and supporting papers to the hospital accountant who shall verify them, retain a copy of the Report of Checks issued by disbursing Officer, and promptly submit them to the central office. No subsequent/additional funding shall be given unless disbursement reports are submitted. Statement of account current shall likewise be submitted with the report of disbursements. Any balance of the cash advance for salaries shall be deposited to the account current. A copy of the validated deposit slip shall be furnished the central office. Unexpended balance covering allocations not encumbered at year-end shall be reported to the central office for adjustment in the central office of obligations incurred and deduction of corresponding cash from subsequent remittance thru the PNB.
	The regional health director shall see to the prompt submission of required reports.
	The central office shall maintain a subsidiary ledger for the account current of the Schistosomiasis Hospital as well as the cash advance issued therefrom. Bank reconciliation statement shall be prepared by the hospital accountant and furnished the central office.


</body>
<sign>J.C. AZURIN. </sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
