Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>27/1/1986</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 146-A s. 1986</docnum>

To: The chiefs of Special Hospitals and Medical centers under the Office of the minister and Dr. Jose N. Rodriguez Memorial Hospital.

<subject>Revision of administrative orders No. 104 dated September 27, 1980 and Mo 86 dated May 19, 1980 regarding procedures on Drugs and X—Ray films procurement for Special Hospitals and Medical Centers under the Office of the Minister and Dr. Jose N. Rodriguez Memorial Hospital.</subject>

<body>
 For purposes of clarity, ease of reference and information, Administrative Orders No. 104 dated September 27, 1980 and No. 86 dated May 19, 1980 as revised are hereby quoted in full hereunder:

Pursuant to the Presidential directive to reduce the cost of drugs and X-ray films purchased by the Ministry of Health to more reasonable levels without sacrif1c1ng quality, MOH Therapeutic Committee was created to formulate procedures for drug and X—ray films procurement, recommend adequate safeguards and to set the rules for the proper implementation of the program on a quarterly basis; 

Accordingly, the following procedures shall, therefore, be strictly observed: 
1. The Committee is authorized to call on technical men to update the list of drugs parenteral solutions and biological used in hospitals medical centers and other inst1tutions rendering secondary and tertiary medical care to serve as the MOH Drug Formulary for guidance.

2. The MOH Therapeutic Committee will distribute to the ten
(10) institutions concerned copies of the List of Drugs for Secondary and Tertiary Care Levels as a guide.

3. The institutions -will submit to the Committee quadruplicate copies their quarterly requirement of drugs and X—ray Films (Standard Form) signed by the Chiefs of the institutions concerned based on the above-mentioned list at least sixty (I60) days before the start of the next quarter

4. The Committee Wi11 review and evaluate the requirements submitted by the institutions before approval by the Minister of Health or his duly authorized representative, the Chairman of the above-stated Committee.


5. For drugs required by the institution not included in the MOH Drug Formulary justifications should be stated.
6. The Committee will request the MOH accredited drug and X-ray firms to submit their quotations on the list of items required by the institutions for evaluation and selection and each firm will be informed of the results within reasonable period.
7. Each institution will be informed of results of the evaluation and selection utilizing the same standard form.

8. Purchase Orders, and Requisition and Issue Vouchers, together with the supporting papers will be prepared and approved by the Chiefs of the Institutions based on the approved price and quantity authorized by the Minister is copy of every purchase order issued shall be furnished by the institution to the Office of the Minister for ready reference. Approval of such Requisitions and Purchase Orders shall strictly adhere to the authority granted under Section II-2 of Administrative Order No. 74-C, dated January 11, 1984, providing for the delegation of authority to approve Requisition and Purchase Orders to Chiefs of Medical Centers and Hospitals directly under the Office of the Minister.

9.  The Bureau of Food and Drugs or any other laboratory duly authorized by the Minister of Health, will undertake testing of the drugs and for the X—ray films, the Radiation Office, this Ministry to determine quality

1O. The Chiefs of the Institutions concerned will submit to the Office_ of- the Minister a summary report of the utilization of accepted drugs and X—ray films at the end of each quarter.

  This Order rescinds any previous Administrative issuances or provisions thereof inconsistent with or contrary to this Order. This Order takes effect upon approval
	By authority of the Minister of Health.

</body>
<sign>ANTONIO C. ACOSTA</sign>
<signtitle>Deputy Minister</signtitle>

