Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>9/12/1986</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 13 s. 1986</docnum>
<subject>
SUBJECT : Subject: Amending the Nursing and Midwifery portion of Administrative Order No. 26-C s. of 1982 on policies, procedures and guidelines governing Affiliation and Training of Students in the Ministry of Health hospitals, rural health units and other agencies.</subject>

<body>
The Ministry of Education, Culture and sports has implemented the revised Bachelor of Science in Nursing Curriculum in Schools Year 1984—1985, and for revised Midwifery curriculum in June 1986. The revision will bring about changes in Nursing and Midwifery Education. Specifically, there will-be a reduction in the number of clinical {hours for every unit of learning experiences of the students. Both curriculum are community oriented with emphasis on Primary Health Care. Accordingly, these changes have implications on the existing policies on affiliation and training of these students, hence, this amendment

Nursing and Midwifery:

1. Hospitals and Rural Health Units and other Health agencies where Nursing and Midwifery students may affiliate to obtain the desired hospital and community health nursing-and midwifery experiences must meet the following requirements:
1.1 Hospitals

1.1.1 Be a general or specialty hospital, accredited by the Ministry of Health as Teaching and Training, with a bed capacity of not less than 100, and an average occupancy of not less than 80%; and be departmentalized such as Medical, Surgical, OB-Gyne and pediatric services for in-patient and out-patients. If possible, a general hospital should, in addition, set-up communicable disease.

 
1.1.2; Have an adequate, well—maintained physical plant with the provision of necessary facilities for training, adequate equipment and supplies, and must follow criteria required for Teaching and Training hospitals.

1.1.3 Have an adequate training staff oriented to the philosophy of nursing and midwifery education and shall be responsible for the training and educational program or nursing personnel including the orientation of clinical instructors of the affiliating school.

1.1.4 Provide the specific area related to the required learning experiences of the students on consultation with school authorities.
1.1.5 Must not allow students to enter the training areas without the clinical instructors to proctor the students provided by the school

1.1.6 Conduct Orientation Program for Clinical Instructor assigned by the school to follow—up students in the clinical area for not less than two (2) weeks and not more than four (4) weeks.


1.2 Rural Health Units/Health Centers

1.2.1 Have an organized community health nursing services to provide the necessary learning experiences of students with emphasis on Primary Health Care.

1.2.2 Have an adequate training facilities, equipment and supplies.

1.2.3 Provide training staff responsible for the training program of nursing personnel including orientation of instructors from the affiliating schools.

1.2.4 Not allow students.in the field practice area without the instructor from the affiliating school.

1.2.5 Conduct orientation program for instructors assigned by the school.

 

2. Colleges of Nursing/Schools of Midwifery:

 

2.1 Provide qualified clinical instructors to proctor students in the hospital and rural health units/health centers. The ratio of clinical instructor as prescribed by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports in the policies and standards for nursing education is:

Level II – 1:8
	III – 1:10
	IV – 1: 12

For midwifery students, one (1) clinical instructor for twelve (12) students.

2.3 Require Clinical Instructors following up student to underwent an orientation course in hospital/rural health units for not less than two (2) weeks and not more than four (4) weeks.

2 4 Subm1t b1o—data of clinical Instructors to the Hospital/Rural Health Units before the start of orientation.

2.5 Require to pay or replace damages, breakages or losses by the faculty- and students in hospitals/rural health units. 

3. Fees and Charges:

 

3.1. Colleges of Nursing shall pay the hospital or rural health unit the amount of forty pesos (P40.00) per student for a maximum of eighty (80) hours a month. For less than two (2) weeks clinical and field experience, the College shall he required to pay ten pesos (P10. 00) per student. Clinical and field experience of more than forty (40) hours, shall pay the maximum amount of forty pesos (P40. 00) per student. Payment shall be made within the first two (2} weeks of affiliati0n.

3.2 Midwifery schools shall pay thirty pesos (P30. 00) per student per month. Payment shall be made within the first two (2) weeks of affiliation.

3.3 Require schools to pay preceptors fee of fifty pesos
(P50. 00) for the orientation of clinical instructors undergoing preceptors' course. Payment shall be made after completion .of such.

4. Special Provision

Other government owned or controlled colleges of nursing and schools of midwifery affiliating to the Ministry of Health shall be required. to pay the required affiliation fee to the hospitals and rural health units

As thus amended, Administrative Order No. 26- C, s. 1982 stands in effect.

  

</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D. </sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
