Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>8/9/1987</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 27 s. 1987</docnum>
<subject>Subject: GUIDELINES ON THE PROCUREMENT AND PAYMENT OF SUPPLIES, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT BY THE DEPARTMENT PROPER: EMERGENCY PURCHASES.</subject>

<body>
In order to maximize utilization of resources, expedite procurement and- payment of supplies, materials and equipment in the Department Proper or Central Office, the following guidelines shall be observed for emergency purchases:

1. Office of origin prepares Requisition and Issue
Voucher (RIV) and has it signed by the Chief of Service as Requisitioning Office.

2. RIV is forwarded to the Undersecretary having direct supervision over the Requ1s1tion1ng Officer.. Undersecretary recommends approval.
3. RIV is forwarded to the Office of the Secretary for approval.

4. Approved HIV 1s forwarded to the Procurement and Logistics service (PLS) for procurement or issuance, after assignment of control =number. If stock is available, items are issued to the requisitioning office indicating the total amount of the requisitioned items. If stock is not available procurement is conducted. 
The Procurement and Log1st1cs Service decides the manner of procurement and required supporting papers. If found in order, the Chief PLS signs pre—numbered Purchase Order (P0) and Abstract of Canvass or other supporting documents and forwards same to the Budget Division,

 5. Budget Division prepares and signs Request for Obligation of Allotment (ROA) and forwards the ROA, PO and abstract of canvass to the accounting division.
6. Accounting Division processes and certifies availability of funds and forwards the PO and supporting papers to the Office of the Secretary or other offices per delegated authority.
7. Approving officials signs purchase order and abstract of canvass per delegated authority.
8. Procurement and Logistics Service releases original copy of the PO to Supplier who should acknowledge receipt by indicating the date of acceptance of the PO.
9. Supplier delivers items to PLS together with pertinent documents to support payment.
10. PLS receives delivery and issues Request for Inspection to DOH Inspection Unit, the Commission on Audit and/or the Bureau of Food and Drug whenever appropriate.

11. DOH/COA/BFAD Inspector conducts inspection/analysis to check compliance with quantity, quality and specifications and submits result to PLS. 

12. PLS prepares disbursement voucher attaching supporting documents. Clerk in the procurement unit fills in box "Prepared by" and head of procurement unit fills in box “Upon request/direction of".  The head of procurement unit signs voucher certificate number 1 and Chief of Service (PLS) signs voucher certificate number 3 and forwards voucher 1 to the Accounting Division.

13. Accounting Division processes voucher. Chief Accountant certifies availability of funds on voucher certificate number 4.

For transactions subject to pre—audit, papers are first forwarded to approving Officials per delegated authority for signature on certificate number 5 and then forwarded to the Commission on. Audit for pre-audit and signature on certificate number 6 by the Auditor.

14. Disbursement and Collection Section prepares and attaches check  for signature by the Cashier.
  
15. The voucher and check are forwarded to the Budget Division for recording and transmitting to approve officials per delegated authority by signing certificate number 5 and countersigning the check.

16. Collection and disbursement section reviews voucher and check, records and releases check to supplier after issuance of official receipt by the Supplier and stamps “PAID” on the voucher and all supporting papers.
  For requisitions during the last two (2) months of the year, ROA and PO with the supporting papers are forwarded to the Commission on Audit for notation purposes pursuant to Executive Order 228 after the accounting Division for the signature of the Department Chief Accountant on the PO or voucher
	The provisions provided under Section 15 and 16 of the General Provisions of the General Appropriation Act limiting the total monthly amount not exceeding four (4) percent or the annual agency expenditure for supplies and materials out of the appropriation allotted for MODE and stock level not to exceed three (3) months requirement except emergency items should be strictly followed.
	All transactions shall be accompanied by a Routing Slip that should be properly accomplished to determine point of reference and time flow of the transactions.
	This Order supersedes all other issuances relative to this matter and shall take effect immediately.
	Strict compliance is hereby enjoined.

 

</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D. </sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
