Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>2/8/1988</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 47 s. 1988</docnum>

<subject>
Subject: Technical Supervision and Coordination Among Health Laboratories in the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
	The Department of Health has established and maintains hospital and public health laboratories at National, Regional, Provincial and Municipal Laboratories. Although administratively under their respective health offices, it is a policy of the Department to coordinate these laboratories I order to utilize laboratory resources to the maximum. The formulation of laboratory development plans demonstrated the need for closer relationship among various levels of laboratories and technical supervision by BRL and Regional laboratories of peripheral laboratories.


1. Levels of Health Laboratories in the DOH
The department of Health Laboratories are classified according to the following levels:
1. National Bureau of Research and Laboratories, Laboratories in medical centers, special and highly specialized hospitals in Metro Manila
2. Regional Designated Integrated Regional Health Laboratories and other laboratories in Regional hospitals and medical centers.
3. Provincial Laboratories in provincial hospitals and/or health offices
4. District Laboratories in district hospitals
5. Microscopy Centers Laboratories in selected Rural Health Units.
6. Laboratories in Community/Municipal hospitals, and special clinics (Malaria, Schistosomiasis, S.T.D, etc.)
2. Policies and guidelines
	2.1 Technical Supervision:
		In order to assure the proper performance and reliability of the results of laboratory examinations, technical supervision by laboratory personnel is imperative. This supervision shall be a supportive function including guidance in technical activities, quality control, training and continuing education.
	The Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall exercise technical supervision over and render consultative services to national and regional laboratories, and indirectly over all peripheral laboratories at all levels. The integrated regional health laboratories shall likewise exercise technical supervision over provincial laboratories, provincial hospital laboratories over district hospital laboratories over Microscopy Centers and other peripheral laboratories. 
	2.2 Reference and Referral Laboratories
	The Bureau of Research and Laboratories and the designated national laboratories shall serve as reference and referral laboratories for all other laboratories. The regional, provincial and district laboratories shall serve as referral laboratories of peripheral laboratories in their areas.
	The system of containers for transport and mailing of referred specimens shall be developed by the BRL to ensure effective referral to the BRL and Regional Laboratories. Such containers will be distributed to Regional and Provincial laboratories and replenished as used. Appropriate standard forms prescribed by the BRL shall be used for requesting referral laboratory services.
	Reports of results of laboratory examinations will be issued by the referral laboratory and sent by mail or other usual medium of communication. Telegrams/radiograms may be utilized for findings which need urgent action.
	2.3 Training and Manpower Development:
	The Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall establish training and manpower Development programs for regional and other laboratories. Such programs both for physicians and technical personnel will be undertaken in collaboration with laboratories in national hospitals and other resources. 
	2.4 Periodic and Uniform Reporting of Work Load:
	Quarterly and annual Reports of work load accomplishments and problems as well as findings of epidemiologic importance shall be reported by each laboratory to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories through proper channels. Consolidated laboratory reports at each level shall be made available to the BRL and Health Intelligence Service. Such reports shall be accomplished in a uniform format designed by the BRL.

2.5 Report of Epidemiologic Significance

	Any laboratory finding of epidemiologic significance or indicating an unusual disease will be reported promptly to the nearest health officer with a copy furnished to Regional Health Office, HIS and BRL. Epidemiologic investigation shall be done when necessary by the Regional Health Office and regional health laboratory or by HIS and BRL as appropriate.


This Order shall take effect immediately and supersedes Administrative Order No. 125-A, s. 1963 and other issuances inconsistent hereof.

</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
