Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>21/11/1988</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 52 s. 1988</docnum>

<subject>
Subject: Defining Certain Specifications of Health Operations in the Province of Camarines Sur.</subject>

<body>
	In the interest of efficient and effective service under the circumstances and condition unique to Camarines Sur and consistent with E.O. No.119, the following specifications shall define certain aspects of health operations in the province of Camarines Sur

1. Libmann District Hospital, previously designated as the provincial hospital of Camarines Sur and integrated into the Provincial Health Office under E.O. 851, is hereby restored to its original status as a distinct and separate district hospital operating under the supervision and control of the provincial Health Officer
2. The provincial Health Office shall be headquartered at Pili, Camarines Sur in order to better supervise and control health operations throughout the province as well as facilitate coordination with the provincial government
3. In consideration of all the above, representations for appropriate plantilla changes and budget release arrangements shall be made with the Department of Budget and Management.
4. Until further notice, no district hospital shall be designated as the provincial hospital of Camarines Sur. The service, referral and technical support functions of the provincial hospital shall be performed by the Bicol Regional Hospital in Naga City (formerly the Camarines Sur Provincial Hospital). While remaining under the supervision and control of the Regional Health Office, the Regional Hospital shall coordinate closely with the Provincial Health Office to assure the prompt and effective response required for these functions.
5. The Provincial Health Officer supervises and controls the field health and hospital operations in the province. Within and immediate catchment area of the Provincial Health Office, this supervision and control is direct. In the hospital and field operations within the catchment areas of the district, medicare and municipal hospitals, this supervision and control is exercised with the chiefs for district hospitals, medicare officers for medicare hospitals. The provincial health officer is authorized to issue instructions and take actions on all matters consistent with such supervision and control.
6. the assistant provincial health officer(s) shall assist the Provincial Health Officer in supervising field health and hospital Operations. The APHO designated for hospitals operations shall assist in terms of supervising and controlling the operations of district,, medicare and municipal hospitals in the province. The APHO designated for public health activities shall assist in terms of supervising and controlling the field health operations at the catchment areas of the PHO, as well as the district, medicare and municipal hospitals in the province. The PHO shall determine the desirable and effective extent of authority that the APHO(s) may exercise under this set-up.

7. In order to promote division of labor under unified leadership, a management committee for the province shall be constituted with the PHO as chairman, and the APHO(s) among others, as members. This committee shall be the venue of discussion for purposes of decision making. Any issue pertinent to the decisions of the PHO shall be articulated at the management committee. The PHO shall have the authority to decide on all operational issues within the limits provided by existing rules and regulations.
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
