Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>29/11/1988</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 53A s. 1988</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Guidelines on the Use of Utility Vehicles and Motorcycles Procured Under the Primary Health Care Financing Project of the United States Agency for International Development</subject>

<body>
	The United states Agency for International Development (USAID) through the Primary Health Care Financing Project has financed the procurement of 15 utility vehicles and 100 motorcycles for the use of the Department of Health. This order provides guidelines on the allocation, distribution and use of these equipment as well as other pertinent matters regarding their disposition
1. Main Purpose Support for EPI
These equipment are being provided primarily for the purpose of supporting the national expanded Program for Immunization (EPI). In all cases, the allocations, distribution, use and operation of these equipment shall be prioritized on the basis of the needs of EPI such as transport of vaccines and EPI supplies, conduct of immunization rounds, field supervision and monitoring for EPI, attendance in meetings and events related to EPI and other similar activities. Only cases of medical emergencies involving possible loss of lives supersede EPI activities in the use of these equipment.
2. Distribution of Vehicles
Fourteen (14) vehicles shall be distributed on the basis of one vehicle per region, including NCR and CAR. The vehicle will be at the Regional Health Office, under the custody of the Regional Health Director who shall assign it specifically to the unit supervising EPI activities, except when it can be shown that EPI can be supported better if the vehicle shall be allocated to Maternal and Child Health Service.
3. Distribution of Motorcycles
3.1 Qualification of recipients: the following shall be required before being considered to be a recipient of a motorcycle under this scheme;
A rural Health Midwife appointed to a permanent item in the DOH assigned to a Barangay Health Station. Non-midwives occupying midwife items or midwives not assigned to a BHS are not qualified under this scheme.
3.2 Prioritization on Criteria:
Considering that more than 100 midwives are expected to qualify under 3.1 above, those that qualify shall be prioritized according to the following criteria supplied nationally:

a) qualified midwives with a total catchment population of at least 3,000 people, in an area with mostly third class roads not accessible via regular modes of transportation and with the farthest two points within the catchment of at least 5 kilometers.
b) If there are more than 100 midwives complying with the above criteria, they shall be ranked on the basis of their EPI performance in terms of fully immunized coverage accomplished over eligible. The first 100 with the highest accomplishment shall be the priority recipients.
3.3 Procedure of Selection: All Regional Health Offices shall require their Provincial Health Offices to submit to the EPI Division, Maternal and Child Health Service (MCHS) the names and the corresponding fully immunized coverage performance in 1987 of those midwives in their respective areas that comply with Criteria 3.1 and 3.2 (a). This shall be submitted on or before January 31, 1989
4. Information on Distribution
As soon as possible, the MCHS shall inform the Regional Offices about the selection and corresponding distribution of vehicles and motorcycles.
5. Documentation Requirements 
5.1 Vehicles shall be covered by memorandum receipts. If the Regional Health Director intends to assume personal responsibility for the use of the vehicle in compliance with this order, he/she shall document it accordingly. If the vehicle shall be assigned to other RHO officials, the documentation should also reflect such assignment
5.2 Motorcycles shall be covered by memorandum receipts signed by the recipient midwife.
5.3 The Regional Immunization Officer shall render a report on the disposition or assignment of vehicles and motorcycles in his or her region. This report shall be submitted to EPI division, MCHS upon completion of the distribution and delivery

6. Other conditions
6.1 All vehicles and motorcycles shall be registered and insured for TPL and own Loss and Damage. The regional Health Director shall be responsible for the vehicle in the RHO while the Provincial Health Officer shall be responsible for motorcycles assigned to midwives in his/her province. Costs of registration and insurance shall be borne by the offices concerned.
6.2 Maintenance and repair costs shall be borne by the offices concerned. Negligent or abusive use may be corrected via administrative discipline or through the withdrawal of the unit from the recipient. 
6.3 Gasoline shall be borne by the offices concerned. TEV of midwives assigned motorcycles shall not be reduced even as the PHO absorbs the costs of gasoline for such motorcycles.
6.4 Upon the retirement, transfer, resignation or death of the motorcycle recipient, the PHO shall arrange to transfer such motorcycle to another deserving midwife on the basis of criteria 3.1 and 3.2 above. Report of such transfer should be forwarded to MCHS as soon as possible.
6.5 Total loss or damage of these items should be reported immediately together with attendant details to MCHS.
6.6 MCHS and the Regional Immunization Officers shall be responsible for implementing this order and monitoring compliance by all concerned.
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D. </sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
