Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>7/6/1988</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 46 s. 1988</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Organizational Arrangements to Implement the National Drug Policy (NDP)</subject>

<body>
	In order to implement the National Drug Policy as announced by the President on April 30, 1987 and as directed by Memorandum Order No. 133 dated November 18, 1987, the following arrangements are hereby ordered.

I. Responsible official for NDP implementation
The assistant secretary in the office for Standards and regulations is hereby designated as the officer with responsibility for coordinating, supervising and controlling the staff activities necessary to implement the National Drug Policy (NDP). For this purpose, the Assistant Secretary shall until further notice be freed from other responsibilities in the Office for Standards and Regulations and shall directly report to the Secretary of Health. The assistant secretary shall be assisted by a staff.

2. Functions of the responsible official for NDP implementation
The designated official shall:
	2.1 advise the Secretary of Health on all matters related to BDP implementation
	2.2 supervise the regular and ad hoc units of DOH with primary role in NDP implementation
	2.3 attend and participate in the deliberation of the Executive Committee for National Field Operation on matters regarding NDP implementation.
	2.4 coordinate the preparation of proposals to further define, better articulate and promptly implement the National Drug Policy consistent with the pertinent issuances of the President, Congress and the instructions of the Secretary of Health.
	2.5 coordinate and assist the appropriate agencies whose mandate and function include various aspects of NDP implementation.
3. Regular Units under the supervision of the responsible official for NDP implementation
The following agencies in the DOH which have primary role in the implementation of the NDP is hereby placed under the technical and administrative supervision of the responsible official for the NDP implementation:
	3. Bureau of Food and Drugs
	3.2 Biological Production Service
	3.3 Herbal Processing Plants in Regions 2, 8, 11 and 12
The supervision of the responsible official shall be exercised by authority of the Secretary of Health
4. Ad-hoc Units Created for NDP implementation
In order to provide staff resources not currently available in the regular organization of the DOH, the following ad hoc units are hereby created with their corresponding functions. These units shall be supervised by the official responsible for NDP implementation.
4.1 The National Drug Committee (NDC)
The National Drug Committee, established by verbal instructions of the Secretary in August 18, 1987 is hereby formalized and confirmed. The NDC shall be composed of at least seven technical experts on basic or clinical pharmacology or medicine or pharmacy or other related fields headed by a chairman.

A department order shall name the chairman and the members as well as the terms of their designation. The NDC shall have the following functions:
	4.1.1 Recommend the criteria to establish and update a National Drug Formulary, which is a listing of drug products deemed necessary and desirable to be made available in the Philippines.
	4.1.2 Recommend, based on the approved criteria, the actual contents of the National Drug Formulary.
	4.1.3 Review from a technical standpoint all decisions and regulation of the BFAD particularly those related to the approval, disapproval, withdrawal or restriction of drug products, prior to final action by the Secretary of Health.
	4.1.4 Advise the Secretary of Health on all related technical matters referred to it.
The committee shall exercise the above functions collectively with the chairman performing the role of spokesperson for NDC. The members of the NDC shall be retained as consultants to the DOH.

4.2 Advisory Committee for BFAD (ACB)
The Advisory committee for BFAD, established by verbal instructions of the secretary on March 1, 1988 is hereby formalized and confirmed. The ACB shall be composed of such experts in pharmacology, pharmacy, management and other disciplines as are necessary for the onset, efficient and effective regulation of food, drugs, and medical devices and cosmetics. The ACB shall be headed by a chairman and such members as to name in the pertinent department order designated them.
The ACB shall have the following functions
	4.2.1 Advise the Director of BFAD on the following matters: recruitment, promotion, training and development of technical personnel; improvement of systems, procedures, equipment and technology; identification of opportunities for strengthening the BFAD organization and program.
	4.2.2 Recommend proposals to improve the technical basis of regulatory implementation, streamline systems and procedures, strengthen actual field effectivity of regulatory standard and policies and enhance transparency and objectivity of regulatory implementation.
	4.2.3 Review existing BFAD processes and practices from the standpoint of consistency with NDP goals and objectives.

4.3 Communication and Information Group (CIG)
The communication and information group shall assist in the public dissemination of information regarding NDP implementation. He CIG shall be headed by the Chief of Public Information and Health Education Service. The CIG shall have the following functions:
	4.3.1 Develop prototype information materials for the wide dissemination of NDP matters
	4.3.2 Plan and execute a communication effort in support of NDP implementation
	4.3.3 Provide staff support and advise on events with public information implication.

5. Other Units Contributing to NDP Implementation
Considering the comprehensive nature of NDP implementation, the pertinent Undersecretary and head of agency of the following units are hereby instructed to coordinate with the official responsible for NDP implementation on the indicated matters.

5.1 Regional Health Offices – on implementation of food and drug regulations in the field
5.2 Hospital operation and management service in the office for hospital and facility services – on establishing DOH hospital policies and regulations regarding drug procurement and use.
5.3 Procurement and Logistics Service in the Office for management service – on establishing DOH drug procurement policies and regulations
5.4 Legislative liaison unit in the Office of the Chief of Staff – on supporting legislation related to drugs and pharmaceuticals.
5.5 RP-Unido Master plan Project
Any other unit whose activities would have an impact on NDP implementation is hereby instructed to also coordinate with the responsible official for NDP implementation.

6. Funding
The activities of the above units shall be funded out of available budgetary resources of DOH as well as any other external assistance made available.
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
