Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>16/1/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 59 s. 1989</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: STANDARDS FOR SERVICE CAPABILITIES, MANPOWER STAFFING
AND EQUIPMENT FOR HOSPITAL LABORATORIES IN THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH</subject>


<body>
Sec. 1 Title; This order shall be known as the ”Standards for Service Capabilities, Manpower' Staffing and Equipment for Hospital Laboratories in the Department of Health.

Sec. 2 Authority: These Standards are issued pursuant to E.0. 119 (Reorganization Act. of the Ministry of Health), specifically the formulation of policies and standards for hospitals under the Office of Hospitals and Facilities Services (Sec. 12) and the formulation of standards and policies for laboratories under the Bureau of Research and Laboratories (Sec. 13 (a)).
Sec. 3 Purpose: This order presides guidelines for the development of all hospital laboratories of the Department of Health such that by 1992, all hospitals will be upgraded to a minimum level of service capabilities, manpower staffing and equipment. 
Sec. 4 Scope: This order shall apply to all hospital laboratories under the Department of Health at all levels. It will complement Administrative Order No. 47, s. 1988, entitled Technical Supervision and Coordination Among Health Laboratories in the Department of Health.


Sec. 5 Levels of Hospital Laboratories:

1. National — Laboratories in medical centers, special and highly specialized hospitals in Metro Manila.
2. Regional - Designated Integrated Regional Health Laboratories and other laboratories in Regional-hospitals and medical centers,
3. Provincial - Laboratories in provincial hospitals and/or health offices.

4. District — Laboratories in district hospitals.

5. Municipal — Laboratories in Municipal and Medicare hospitals.


Sec 6. Minimum Standards for Service Capabilities:

 

The Minimum Standards for Service Capabilities for each level of hospital laboratory shall be those specified, in Annex A.

Sec. 7 Minimum Standards for Manpower Staffing: 
The minimum standards for manpower staffing of DOH Laboratories shall be those specified in Annex B.

Sec. 8 Minimum Standards for Equipment:
The minimum standards for Equipment for DOH Laboratories shall be those specified in Annex C.

Sec. 9 Integrated Regional Health Laboratories: Additional provisions for Service Capabilities, Manpower Staffing and Equipment are provided for those hospital laboratories in the Region to which the Regional Health Laboratories have been integrated shall be used as guidelines in the formulation of laboratory development plans in each hospital under the guidance of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories and the formulation of hospital development plans under the supervision of the Office of Hospitals and Facilities Services.

Sec. 11 Annual Hospital Budgets: The formulation of the hospital budgets for each year shall endeavor to attain these minimum standards of service capabilities, manpower staffing and equipment in the laboratory not later than 1992 in consonance with the Hospital Equipment Guidelines.

Sec. 12 Authorized Bed Capacity: These minimum standards are based on the requirements for the number of authorized beds stated. If the hospital has a greater authorized bed capacity, it may provide for additional manpower staffing and equipment in its budget.




Sec. 13 Application of Minimum Standards: These standards are prescribed as minimum for each level. A hospital laboratory may exceed these standards based on its nature, size, location, demand for certain services and other factors. Such additional service capabilities shall be allowed upon proper justification in the context of overall hospital development plans and networking of hospital facilities.

Sec. 14 Consultative Services from the Bureau of Research and Laboratories:

Pursuant to Executive Order 119 and Administrative Order No. 47, s. 1988, the Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall be responsible for setting standards for the establishment and operation of hospital laboratories. The BRL shall be consulted by hospitals concerned regarding laboratory planning and operations whenever necessary.

Sec. 15 Effectivity This order shall take effect immediately upon dissemination to all central offices and Regional Health Offices.
The latter are instructed to disseminate the order to all field offices concerned.


</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 
