Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>January 2, 1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 55-A s. 1989</docnum>

<subject> 
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ACCREDITATION OF LABORATORIES PERFORMING HIV TESTING</subject>

<body>
     Sec. 1 - Title: These Rules and Regulations shall be known as the "RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ACCREDITATION OF LABORATORIES PERFORMING HIV TESTING”. 

     Sec. 2 -  Authority: These rules and regulations are issued in accordance to R.A. 4688 (Clinical Laboratory Law) and R.A. 1517 (Blood Bank Law) consistent with E.0. 119 (Reorganization Act of the Ministry of Health).

     Sec: 3 - Purpose: These rules and regulations are promulgated to protect and promote the health of the people by regulating the performance and assuring the quality of HIV testing in laboratories and blood banks licensed according to the implementing Rules and Regulations of R. A. 4688 and R.A. 1517. 

      Sec. 4 – Scope:
4.1 The regulations embodied herein shall apply to any person, firm, corporation, laboratory or blood bank performing or seeking to perform HIV testing in the Philippines for the public for diagnostic or public health purposes. HIV testing shall include the determination of the presence of antibody, antigen/protein, viral particles in a clinical specimen indicating infection by Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).

      Sec. 5 - Regulatory Authority: The Accreditation of HIV Testing Laboratories/Blood banks under these rules and regulations shall be exercised by the Department of Health through the Bureau of  Research and Laboratories in the Office for Standards and Regulation 


      Sec. 6 – Laboratory Procedures Requiring Accreditation: 
       6.1 Any of the following laboratory procedures shall require accreditation as HIV Testing Laboratory: 
       1) Screening tests for HIV antibody 
       1.1 Enzyme Immunoassay (EIA) 
       1.2 Particle Agglutination (PA) 
       1.3 Others 
       2) Supplemental (Confirmatory) Tests for HIV Antibody 
       2.1 Western Blot (NB) 
       2.2 Immunoflourescence (IF) 
       2.3 Radioimmuno Precipitation Assay (RIPA) 
       2.4 Others 
       3) Other laboratory procedures such as testing for HIV antigen, culture of HIV, etc.
 6.2	No Laboratory shall be allowed to perform HIV testing without accreditation by the Department of Health through the Bureau of Research and Laboratories. 
6.3	No HIV clearance certificate shall be authenticated by the DOH unless the laboratory procedure has been performed by a laboratory accredited in accordance 
to these rules and regulations.
 

Sec. 7 - Accreditation Requirements for a HIV Testing Laboratory:
             (Technical Standards) 

7.1	All clinical laboratories or blood banks shall
be required to demonstrate compliance with the following Technical Standards as a requirement 
to accreditation: 
1) The clinical laboratory or blood bank shall be duly licensed by the Bureau of Research and Laboratories. 
2) The laboratory shall be headed by and under the direction and supervision of a duly licensed physician who is certified by the Philippine Board of Pathology or Philippine Board of Hematology and Blood Transfusion. 
3) The laboratory shall be staffed by medical technologists duly registered with the Board of Medical Technology, who have undergone acceptable training in HIV Testing duly certified



Administrative Order
Page 3
==================
by a training laboratory.
4) The physical plant shall be housed in well-lighted and ventilated, dust-free areas with an adequate supply of water. The space appropriately furnished, should be sufficient to accommodate the activities needed for HIV Testing.
5) Equipment, glassware and supplies:
6) Reagents:
The laboratory shall utilize reagents, such as HIV kits, which have been registered with the bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD).
7) Report forms – The report forms should be clear, objective and indicate the type of HIV kit (brand/manufacturer) utilized.
7.2 	The bureau of Research and Laboratories shall evaluate compliance with such technical standards in accordance to requirements as may be promulgated under these Rules and Regulations.
Sec. 8 – Reporting:
Each HIV testing laboratory shall report monthly the number of tests done, results and referrals of seroreactive samples in accordance with the format prescribed by the Bureau of Research and Laboratories. The report shall be accompanied by xerox copies of invoices of purchases of HIV kits the previous month.
Sec. 9 – Referral of Seroreactive Serum Samples:
9.1	All serum samples reactive in screening tests (EIA or PA) by private laboratories shall be referred to the Research Institute of Tropical Medicine for confirmation.
9.2	All serum samples reactive in screening tests (EIA or PA) by government laboratories shall be referred to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories for confirmation.
9.3 	The names, age, sex and addresses of persons confirmed to be seropositive (by WB/ IF/RIPA) shall be reported to AIDS Registrar, Health Intelligence Service, DOH in accordance to Department Circular No. 11, s. 1987 dated March 11, 1987.
9.4	Such person shall be informed of the implications of a seropositive test and the requirement of a confidential report to the AIDS Registry.
Sec. 10 –Quality Control tests:	The Director of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories or his representative is hereby authorized to conduct such quality control tests as he deems appropriate or necessary for the administration of these regulations, for the control of operations and as criteria for the renewal of certificates. 



Sec. 11 – Inspection: HIV testing laboratory facilities and records shall be subject to regular inspections to determine compliance with the above regulations.
11.1 The Director of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories or his duly authorized representative(s) shall be given reasonable tine and opportunity to inspect the premises and facilities wherein the HIV testing is being performed. 
11.2 Each laboratory shall make available to the Director of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories or his duly authorized representative all records kept pursuant to these regulations for inspection. 
11.3 The Director of the Bureau Of Research and Laboratories or his representative may be assisted by duly designated experts from professional associations in such inspections.
11.4 Directors of Regional Health Offices, Provincial, and Municipal Health Officers are hereby directed to report to the Bureau of Research and existence of any private unaccredited HIV testing party performing such test without a proper accreditation certificate.
Sec. 12 - Basic Accreditation Requirements: Any person, firm or corporation desiring to perform HIV testing shall submit to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories, a sworn petition/ application on the prescribed form and containing among others, the following data: 
1) Name, citizenship and domicile of the head of the HIV Testing Laboratory.
2) *text missing*
3) Name of the establishment.
4) Name, Citizenship and domicile of the owner;
5) Copy of a valid permit to operate a clinical laboratory or blood bank from the Department of Health, and;
6) Scope of the nature of work to be undertaken.
Sec. 13 – Application for Accreditation:
13.1	An application for accreditation shall be filed in a form  "Application for Accreditation of Laboratories performing HIV testing"  with the Office of the Bureau of Research .and Laboratories for screening and approval. 
13.2	Each application shall be signed under oath or affirmation by the applicant or a person duly authorized to act for and on his behalf.
13.3 	Within 60 days after receipt of said application together with the accreditation fee, an inspector from the Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall inspect the establishment and verify if the applicant has complied with the requirements prescribed in these regulations.
13.4	Any material false statement in the application or failure to comply with requirements may serve as basis of the Director of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories to refuse recommending the issuance of a certificate of accreditation.
Sec. 14 – Accreditation Fees:
14.1	A non-refundable fee shall be charged for every application for an accreditation certificate issued for the performance of HIV Testing for government and private laboratories.
14.2	A non-refundable fee is charged on application of renewal if filed at least sixty (60) days before the accreditation expires.
14.3	All fees shall be payable to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories in accordance with the following schedule:
		For New Certificates:		P 500.00
		For Renewal of Certificates:   P 250.00
14.4	A penalty of P 200.00 for late renewal shall be charged in addition to the renewal fee when filed within sixty (60) days after *text missing*
14.5 	Sixty (60) days after expiration of accreditation unrenewed certificates shall be considered lapsed, and a new certificate shall have to be applied for.




Sec. 15 – Issuance and Exhibition of Certificate of Accreditation:
15.1	The certificate wilI be issued and signed by the Undersecretary of Health for Standards and Regulation if the application is found to be meritorious and the fees duly paid: otherwise the same shall not be approved. 
15.2	The accreditation certificate should be placed in a conspicuous place within the laboratory. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be readily available for the guidance of the staff in the laboratory.
Sec. 16 – Terms and Conditions of Accreditation:
16.1	The certificate as herein granted or any right under the certificate shall not be assigned or otherwise transferred directly or indirectly to an unauthorized party.
16.2	The owner or manager of any HIV testing laboratory desiring to transfer to another place shall inform the Bureau of Research and Laboratories in writing, stating the new place and site of the establishment within fifteen (15) days after such transfer. The new facilities shall be subject to re-inspection before it can resume operation.
16.3	 Any HIV antibody laboratory desiring to stop operation should notify the Bureau of Research and Laboratories stating the said date of termination.
16.4	Any pathologist who decides to terminate services or transfer supervision should inform the Bureau of Research and Laboratories within fifteen (15) days after such termination of transfer.
16.5	Failure to report in writing within 15 days any change in conditions of Accreditation will be cause for suspension or revocation of the certificate of Accreditation of the laboratory.
Sec. 17 – Expiration of Accreditation Certificate:
	Each accreditation certificate shall expire one year after the date of approval of the certificate such date being indicated in the upper right hand corner of the certificate.
Sec. 18 — Renewal: Application for renewal of Certificates shall be filed at least sixty (60) days before the expiration of the certificate in accordance to Sec. 14. The Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall process applications for renewal immediately upon receipt thereof subject to inspection upon the discretion of the Director; provided however, that such HIV testing laboratory may continue operation pending action on their application, unless otherwise advised or ordered by the Director, Bureau e: Research and Laboratories or his representative to cease operation. 



Sec. 19 – Publication of List of Accredited Laboratories:
19.1	A list of laboratories and blood banks accredited for HIV testing under these rules and regulation shall be published periodically and be made available to any person, agency or organization for legitimate purposes.
19.2	The results of quality control testing shall likewise be published.
Sec. 20 – Modification and Revocation of Certificates:
	The terms and conditions of each certificate shall be subject to amendment or modification by means of amendments to these regulations as the Secretary of Health may redeem necessary. Except in cases of willful, or repeated violations hereof, or where public health interest or safety requires otherwise, no certificate shall be modified, suspended or revoked unless prior notice has been made and the corresponding investigation conducted.
Sec. 21 – Violations:
21.1	The certificate of accreditation of a laboratory to perform HIV testing shall be suspended or revoked by the Undersecretary of Health for Standards and Regulation for any violation of these Rules and Regulations, which may include among others:
1) 	Operating an HIV Testing Laboratory without a qualified pathologist or 
       Hematologist or medical technologist.
		2)	Any material false statement in the application.
		3)	Utilizing unregistered HIV testing kits.
4)	Repeated failure to submit a monthly report with accompanying Xerox copies of invoices to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories.
5)	Failure to submit seroreactive samples for supplemental (confirmatory) testing to the Research Institute of Tropical Medicine or Bureau of Research and Laboratories.
6)	Failure to report confirmed seropositive cases to the AIDS registry, HIS, DOH.
7)	Refusal to allow inspection of laboratory by persons authorized by the Bureau of Research and Laboratories during reasonable hours.
8)	Refusal to perform tests on quality control samples required by the Bureau of Research and Laboratories.
9)	Failure to correct deficiencies within a reasonable time after due notice from the Bureau of Research and Laboratories.
	21.2	Any HIV Testing Laboratory that violates these rules and regulations shall be liable under the Clinical Laboratory Law (R.A 4688) or Blood Bank Law (R.A 1517) and suffer penalties provided for in the law and the Revised Rules and Regulations issued pursuant to such law. Such violations shall be basis for sanctions including suspension or revocation of the license to operate the Clinical Laboratory or Blood Bank.
Sec. 22 – Effectivity;	These rules and regulations shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in the Official Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>



