Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>6/6/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 72 s. 1989</docnum>
						
TO 			: All Chiefs of Medical Centers/Special and Specialty Hospitals directly under the Office of the Secretary of Health.
<subject>SUBJECT : Adjustment of Complaints and Grievances in' the hospital setting. </subject>
<body>
1. ADJUSTMENT OF COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCES
		in the, hospital setting, the adjustment of complaints and 'grievances between and among employees or between employee and supervisor should be settled as much as possible within the; organizational unit (Section/Department/Division) which is the focus of such complaints and/or grievances. '
	Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35 of Presidential Decree No. 807 and Rule XIII of the Revised Civil Service Law Rules, the following regulations are hereby promulgated and established to govern the adjustment of complaints and grievances of officers and employees in the medical centers/special/specialty hospitals. 
	A. PURPOSE • The grievance procedure is intended to help promote  some and desirable-employee 	relations in' the dissatisfaction.
	B .DEFINITION OF TERMS  For purposes of' these regulations, the following are the concepts adopted 	and used:
		1. A COMPLAINT means an employee's expressed feelings  of 
		dissatisfaction with some aspects of his working conditions, relationships or status which are 			outside of his control. 
		2.A GRIEVANCE  is a complaint which has. in the first instance and in the employee's opinion, 			been ignored, overridden. or dropped without due consideration. 
		3. The- GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE refers to the method of determining and finding the best 			way to remedy the specific cause of the complaint or grievance. 
	C. SCOPE • The grievance procedure shall be applied when the dissatisfaction arises, in the day-to-day 	working relationships between employees or between employee and supervisor. . It shall not apply to cases 	of dissatisfaction with official actions finally taken by the Office, nor in disciplinary cases. -
	Complaints and/or grievances may refer to any of the following:
		1.Unsatisfactory working conditions; l
		2.Improper, tedious or laborious work ‘assignments;
		3.Faulty tools or equipment; • •1
		4.Unsatisfactory personnel and/or work process;
		5.ImprOper placements;
		6.ImprOper appreciation of the factors relative to lay-off, promotions, salary increase and transfer;
		7.Arbitrary exercise of discretion;
		8.Inter-personnel relations;
		9.Policies, practices, and procedures of particular Units,  Divisions or Offices within this scope; 			and
		10.All other complaints and grievances embraced within this scope.

	D. 'GUIDING PRINCIPLES • Any officer or employee of the medical centers7special7specialty hospitals 	under the Department of Health shall have the right to present his complaints and/or grievances to the 	Management and to have his complaints and/or grievances adjusted in accordance with these regulations:
		1.An employee shall first discuss his problem informally with his immediate supervisor before 			considering the filing of a formal written complaint;
		2. An employee presenting a complaint or grievance 'shall be assured freedom from coercion, 			discrimination or reprisal and of a speedy and impartial adjustment or such complaint or 				grievance;
		3.Complaints and/or grievances shall be settled at the lowest possible level; 
		4.The grievance proceedings shall be as simple as possible 'and shall not be bound by legal rules 			or technicalities. Employing the services or a counsel is not necessary;
		5.The grievance procedure shall be aimed at determining what is right, not. what is wrong;
		6.A complaint or grievance shall be considered not only in relation to its alleged object, but also in 		relation 	to the personal situation of the complement;
		7.The right of employees to appeal decisions on grievances, in accordance with the pro Visions of 			these regulations, shall not as curtailed.

	E• PROCEDURE •• The procedure for seeking redress of complaints and grievances shall be as follows:
		1.Oral discussions -  A complaint shall be presented orally in the first instance to the employee’s. I			mmediate supervisor who shall, within three (3) days from date of presentation, inform the 			employee orally of his decision. In the oral discussion, the following shall be observed:
			a..The employee shall be at ease Every effort shall e exerted to make the employee who 				has complaint feel at ease during the oral discussion
		    	b. The employee shall be encouraged to talk• The employee shall be allowed to tell or 				explain his side during the oral discussion. 
		c. Privacy in discussion. An oral discussion shall  be held it"; quiet and private place where the 			conversation cannot be interrupted or overheard•.
		d. he case shall be heard fully. The supervisor shall  seek to keep his views and opinions entirely 			to him-self until after the employee has explained his side. 
		e. A definite closure shall be reached• it the end of the discussion, the supervisor must be prepared 		to state his position clearly, accurately, and without any attitude of ill feeling towards the 				employee. He need not immediately give a definite decision, but it shall be given within three (3) 			days from the presentation of the complaint.
	2. Grievance in writing . If the employee is not satisfied  with the oral decision, he may submit his 	grievance in .
		writing through his immediate supervisor, who shall forward the grievance with his comments, 	within 	twenty-four
	(24) hours, to the Chief of the primary unit or to the next higher  supervisor as the case may be, who shall 	within five (5) days from receipt thereof inform the employee in writing through the immediate supervisor, 	of his decision: Provided, however, That where the object of his grievance is the Chief of his Unit or 	Section or an employee or official in another Unit or Section in the same Division, or the personnel of 	another Division, the complainant may bring his grievance in writing, direct to his Chief of Division who 	shall refer the grievance to the other Division Chief concerned for proper action• The Division Chief 	concerned shall render his decision within five (5) days from receipt of the grievance; Provided 	furthermore, That where the object of his grievance is the Chief of Division, the complainant may present 	his grievance in writing, direct to the Chief of Hospital or Head of Office concerned.
		a. If the complainant is not satisfied" with the decision of his immediate supervisor, he may 			appeal his grievance in writing to the Chief oz Hospital or Head of Office concerned, who shall 			forward the same together with any comments he wishes to make within five (5) days from receipt 		thereof .
		b Upon receipt of the complaint or grievance. the am: of Hospital or Head of Office shall review 			the issues and resolve such complaint or grievance within ten (10) days.
/
`	II• EMPLOYEE-SUPERVISOR RELATIONS COFMITTEE
		If end when the employee “is not satisfied with prior decisions on his grievance  he my submit 		thru channels his grievance in writing to the Employee-Supervisor Relations Committee constituted for the 	purpose.
		 A. Organization at the Hospital Level
			There will be one Committee to be established in each of the medical 			centers/special/specialty hospitals under the Department of Health.
		1. Creation end composition • to be covered by s Hospital Order
			1.1 One Chairman 		) to be designed by the 
							) Chief of Hospital/Head of 
			1.2 One permanent member 	)Office concerned 
			1.3 Two transient member- one to be chosen by the complainant, and the other is the 				chief of the primary unit which is the focus of the complaint/ grievance.  
	2.Modes/Approaches – Understanding  Filipino worker. 
		To understand the Filipino Worker, we trust "amber that we ourselves are as such ss e worker like other with sore rules for the worker to follow and comply with the more errors are  committed by the worker• '
		2.1 Bureaucratic (the legal system) approach
			(a)  laws
				- P.D. 807		
				- E.O. 180				which the 
				- Labor Code 				 Filipino worker 
			(b) CSC rule/ regulation 				must be conscious of
			(c) Office policies 


	2.2  No bureaucratic (the culture). system) approach
	The customary we: 

		(a) Filipino nasal" traits - these are saligang pamantayan or the core value.
		relating to- 

			"Pakikipagkapwa" = individual relationship 
			with each other (the relational imperatives)
 			"Pakikisama " sa lugar-  meaning concerned
			about, supportive of (for social purposes).
			 'Pakikiramay" - meaning to be sympathetic
			with. to assist ( for orises purpose.)
		(b) Filipino "academia" • feelings, sentimentality, sensitivity 
		
			(1) "Hiya!" - meaning politeness (for social effect)
			(2) "Amor Propio" •• self-esteem/selt•1mage;
			refinement of character
			(3) "Awa" •• to sympathize with people in
			time of crisis
		(c) Filipino "dangal" - the more Imperative.
			(1.) Bahala (without the "na") ka. bahala 
			kaye - this is e personal delegation •			
			(for social effect) 
			(2) Galang (respect)—meaning “respect me
			 as a human being if you cannot respect 
			my position”( for personal effect) 
			(3) Utang na loob ( the exis)
3/ Guiding principles for the supervisor/manager in grievance handling- 

	3.1 Take a pro-active rather than a preventive attitude on the matter.
	3.2 Establish a sense of identity with your people, take pride in them, and be committed to their welfare. 
	3.3 Be objective, not subjective: impersonal, not personalistic; and organization-wise, not formalistic. 
	3.4 Be group-oriented --- consistent, fair, just and firm in your stand. 





	3.5 Above all, reconcile the legal. armature with the human wines/the cultural norms•

	Hence, the general rule is:
		First, exhaust all ways and means or the cultural approach  beet resort the legal approach.

	4. Procedure 
 		4.1 The Chairman shall immediately schedule e hearing within e reasonable period during office hearing a reasonable period during Office hours at  suitable time and place.
		4.2 All members or the Committee shall be present during the hearings; and all proceedings before the Committee shall be reduced to writing. For this say ethnographer/s employed in the Hospital
		concerned.
		4.3The procedures enumerated under No. B• 1• e••c'• or these regulations shall also apply in Committee adjustment employee grievance. 
		4.4 The complainant shall be given ample time for an oral exposition of his grievance, citing. if
		possible, the management principles or sound personnel violated by inaction on his grievance, or  			the detriment to his right; and privileges or to the public interest ii' correction is not made on the 			complained aspect of his working condition. relationships or status. 
		4.5 The complement shall not be permitted dwell on expect not covered by his grievance in
		writing.
		4.6 The officer or employee effected by the grievance shall be allowed by the Committee ample 			chance to present his side. 
		4.7 Both complainant and the respondent or any  officer or employee involved shall be allowed to submit evidence or present witnesses before the Committee hearing.
		4.8 The committee shall immediately sit in consultation, and shall submit its findings and recommendations to the Chief of hospital or head of office, as the case may be, within ten (10) days termination of the hearing. 



		5. Effective of Decision • Unless otherwise provided, the decision or the Chief of Hospital or Head or  Office concerned as the case may be, shall take effect immediately, after receipt thereof by the complainant and all parties effected. 
		6. Administrative Liability • Any officer or employee who violates the procedure for seeking 			redress of complaints and grievances as herein prescribed shall be subject to administrative 			disciplinary actions.
		7.Responsibility  of the Personnel Officer • All written proceedings and records involving complaints end grievances shall be kept by end be the responsibility of the Personnel Officer of 	the Hospital concerned. Certified true copies thereof shall However be furnished the Department Personnel Officer.


	III• EMPLOYEE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

	A•.OBECTI'IBS 
		1. Main • To enhance the knowledge of movement administrators on public sector monism and to 	develop among them greater understand thereof and e more positive attitude tower 	unionism.
		2. Specific - To develop awareness on the extent and present state of public sector unionism;
			- To be able to understand the value: or. establish and observing grievance procedures; and.
			- To know the various alternative actions which the management may pursue in the event 	of strike situation.
	B. CREATIONZORGMJIZATION of me ENROYEE-DWMGSI'IENI RELATION (EMAR) 
	COMMITTEE
		There shell be en ENAR Committee for each of the medical  centers, special and specialty 	hospitals under the DOH.

		1• Creation and  composition at the hospital me; ••• to be covered by e Hospital Order. 
		
			1.1 One (1) rank-and-file representative 
			1.2 Members:

			(a)  Hospital Administrative Officer- Chairman 
			(b) One (1) Legal Officer- Alternate Chairman 
			( c) One (1) from Planning and Management Staff under the Office of the Chief of Hospital 
			(d) Personnel Officer 
			(e) Two transient member- one to be chosen by the complaining employee/s and the other is the Head of the Division or of the primary Units, which it the focus of the complaint/ grievance. 

		1.3 Secretariat- Technical Staff of the Personnel Section

	C. FUNCTIONS  -  The EMAR Committee shall
:
		1• Investigate any reported anomaly or check on any reported grievance of the union concerned;
		2• Gather evidence: in relation to number 1;
		3• Act as e conciliation body;
		4.In Make all necessary efforts to prevent the escalation of. . grievances or dissatisfaction from the rank-and-file;
		5• Maintain and establish s line of communication to prevent and/or resolve existing disputes.

 	D. The EMAR Committee shall: 
 	 
		1.Have the power to issue subpoena duces tecum and subpoena testificandum and such other power as may be necessary in the exercise of their functions;
		2. Possess the authority to implement actions/ solutions to grievance presented as agreed upon 	between the concerned parties; 
 		3. Have the power to adopt contingencies to handle the disputes end/or strikes; and
		4. Have the power to compel the disputing parties to submit their dispute to arbitration in order to protect public interest and welfare.

	E. PROCEDURE/MECHANICSIN HANDLING CONFLICT BETWEEN MANAGEMENT AND
	EMPLOYEE
	
	1. The grievance/conflict may be filed in writing by an individua1• The same must be settled first at the lowest level normally between the aggrieved employee and his supervisor within five (5) days from date of  	receipt.
	2. In case of failure to resolve the same, the complaint is elevated to the higher level in succession until the complaint is filed with the EMAR Committee and finally reaches the Chief of Hospital for decision on the 	complaint within ten (10) days from date of receipt of Committee’s recommendation  
	3• In the event tint the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Chief of Hospital, the same is elevated to the Office of the Undersecretary of Health for hospital  and Facilities Services within ten (10) 	days from date of receipt of the decision. If the employee is still not satisfied with the decision. the complaint is elevated to the Merit System Protection Board of the CSC within fifteen (15) days from the 	date of receipt of un decision•
	4.In Failure to elevate the some within fifteen (15) days will be construed as e waiver and the decision of the Health Undersecretary  concerned becomes binding to the employee/s concerned.

	F. OTHER MODES OF SETTLING DIPUTES 

		 1. Negotiation 
	 		A process whereby representative of the employees and management meet for the purpose of reaching agreement are to be administered.

	The following term and conditions of employment
	may be negotiated

	1•1 Schedule of vacation leave;
	1•2 Work assignment t of pregnant women;
	1•3 personnel l growth end development;
	1•4 Provision for protection and safety;
	1•5 Physical fitness program;
	1•6 Provision for family planning services for
	ferried women: . .
	1•8 Recreational, social, athletic and cultural
	activities and facilities.

	The following terms am conditions cannot be negotiated:

	1•1 Increase in salary emolument and other allowance  not presently provided for by law;
	1•2 Facilities requiring capital outlaw"
	1•3 Car plan;


	1.4 Provident fund;
	1.5 Special hospitalization, medical and dental
	services; 
	1.6 Rice. sugar and other subsidies;
	1.7 novel expenses; '
	1.8 Increase in retirement benefits; end
	1.9 Other. such as

	(a) appointment
	(b) assignment/detail
	(c) classification/upgrading of position •
	(d) promotion
	(e) ' revision or compensation structure
	(f) penalties imposed as as result of
	disciplinary actions
	(g) selection of personnel to attend
	seminars
	(h) distribution of work load; and
	(i) external communication  linkages

		However, submission of proposals to the proper authorities to improve the terms and conditions of
	employment is allowed. 
	
	 2. Conciliation
		A process whereby conciliator designated by the Committee brings the representatives of the discuss their differences and assist them in developing their on proposed solution. 
	3. Mediation 
		A process whereby a third party designed by the Committee as mediator takes a more active part in assisting the parties to reach an acceptable solution to the problems and helps the conflicting 			parties develop or come out with  an acceptable solution. 
	4. Arbitration 
		A process whereby a third party not acting as a court of low, empowered by the Committee to make a decision which disposes of the disputes. 

					Kinds of Arbitration:
		4.1 Voluntary arbitration
			A method of settling dispute where the parties them submit the "controversy” 
			 before an arbitrator or panel of arbitrator Initially acceptable to both parties who shall 				render an award after proper hearing of the issues involved. The parties abide by 				whatever award of decision the arbitrator renders.
		4•2 Compulsory arbitration 
 			 A method wherein the employee- Management Relations Committee compels 
			the disputing parties to submit their dispute. to arbitration in order to
			protect public interest and welfare!

		Upon approval of this Administrative Order and in accordance with the provisions thereof, the 		Chiefs of the Medical Centers/Special and Specialty Hospital are hereby directed to organize establish their 	respective EMEOYMUPERVISOR RELATIONS (Grievance Committee and EMPLOYEE-	MANAGEMENT RELATIONS (EMAR) Committee within fifteen (15) dam from receipt hereof and
	both Committee. shall be operational immediately. The organizational set-up the said Committees should be submitted to the Office of the Undersecretary for Hospital and Facilities Service for approval. and copies thereof
should be furnished the Office for Management Services thru it: Administrative Serviced 

	Strict and prompt compliance herewith by all concerned in enjoined


</body>									
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
