Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>18/7/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 74 s. 1989</docnum>

<subject>Subject: GUIDELINES FOR PAYMENT OF PERSONNEL CLAIMS NOT COVERED BY COMPUTERIZED MONTHLY PAYROLL</subject>

<body>
	To implement effective control procedure while providing check and balance on financial transaction, the preparation of disbursement voucher/general payroll representing claims for personal services for Offices in the Department proper is hereby relegated to the Payroll Unit (PU), Personnel Division, Administrative Service as per Department Order No. 243-B s, 1988 dated August 24, 1988
	In this regards, the following guidelines are hereby provided for the guidance and implementation by all concerned:
1. Two modes of payment may be used in paying various claims for personal services - through disbursement voucher (DV) or general payroll (GP). The DV shall be used to pay individual claim while the GP shall be used to pay a group of claimants individually entitled to a similar claim.

1.1 The following claims may be paid through DV:
	1.1.1 First Salary
	1.1.2 Salary differential through Promotion
	1.1.3 Commutation of sick/vacation leave credits including maternity leave
	1.1.4 Terminal leave
	1.1.5 Salary Canceled from the Payroll
	1.1.6 Underpayment
1.2 The following may be paid through GP:
	1.2.1 Time book and Payroll for Daily Wage
	1.2.2 Bonus
	1.2.3 General increase in salary
	1.2.4 Clothing allowance
	1.2.5 Other benefits and remunerations

2. The following procedure shall be observed in preparation and processing of claims through DV as illustrated in the flow chart marked annex 2.
	2.1 The DV shall be prepared upon request of the Chief of Office/Service and submission of the required supporting documents by the claimant with the use of the form marked as annex 1. the box "Prepared by" of DV shall be signed by the person in the PU, Personnel Division duly designated to prepare the voucher.
	2.2 The box "Upon request/Direction of" of the DV shall be signed by the head of PU.
	2.3 The DV shall be forwarded to the Chief of Office/Service for signature on Certificate No. 3 after initial by the supervisor of the claimant.
	2.4 The duly certified DV shall be forwarded to the Budget Division for the preparation of Request for Obligations of Allotment (ROA) and for the signature of the Chief Budget Division irrespective of amount or in his absence by his duly authorized alternate.
	2.5 The DV, ROA, and supporting documents are forwarded to the Accounting Division for certification as to availability of funds and signature on Certificate No. 4 of the DV. Original of ROA is retained with the accounting Division as the subsidiary ledger for the unliquidated obligation.
	2.6 The DV and supporting documents are forwarded to the Cashier for issuance of the check.
	2.7 The signed check, DV, and supporting papers are forwarded to the Budget Division or other offices concerned for the approval of the claim and countersignature of check.
	2.8 Countersigned check, together with the approved DV and other supporting papers are returned to the Cashier for release.
	2.9 Claimant receives check, fills and signs the receipt portion of the DV and signs the checks register to acknowledge the receipt of the check, after which all supporting papers and the DV are stamped "PAID"
3. The following procedures shall be observed in the preparation of payment for claims through the use of the GP as illustrated in the flow chart marked Annex 3:
	3.1 The (GP) shall be prepared by the PU only after the receipt of specific instructions from the Office of Management Service.
       3.2 The GP is forwarded to the Head of Office/Service concerned for signature on Certificate No. 1, furnishing the Cashier an advance copy of the GP with the denomination schedule for preparation of the pay envelope.
       3.3 the GP is forwarded to the Budget Division for preparation of the ROA and signature of the Chief Budget Division or in his absence his duly designated alternate irrespective of the amount
       3.4 The GP, ROA, and supporting documents are forwarded to the Accounting Division for certification as to availability of funds and the signature on Certificate No. 4 of the DV. Original of ROA is retained with the Accounting Division as the subsidiary ledger for the unliquidated obligation.
       3.5 GP is forwarded to the official authorized to approved per delegation of authority.
       	3.6 Approved GP is forwarded to the Cashier to effect payment to the individual claimant, out of the cash advance issued for the purpose.
       
       4. Payment of claims thru GP is on cash basis out of the cash advance issued of the purpose. The procedure in processing the disbursement voucher for cash advance (DVCA) is illustrated in Annex 4 in accordance with the herein guidelines:
       4.1 PU prepares the DVCA simultaneously with the GP. Personnel in the PU duly authorized to prepare the DVCA signs the box “Prepared by” and the Officer in charge of the PU signs box “Upon Request/Direction of”.
       4.2 DVCA is forwarded to the respective Chief of Office/Service for their signature on Certificate No. 2
       4.3 The DVCA and the supporting documents are forwarded to the Accounting Division for certification as to availability of funds and signature on Certificate No. 4.
       	4.4 The Cashier upon receipt of the DVCA prepares the check
       	4.5 DVCA is forwarded to the Budget Division for control purposes, approval, and signing of the check in line with the delegation of authority.
       	4.6 Countersigned check with the DVCA is returned to the Cashier for encashment and payment to the employees
       5. The following provisions shall be strictly adhered to in payment, preparation and processing of claims for personal services and other personal claims:
       	5.1 Supporting documents per checklist at the back of the disbursement voucher shall be made available in the required number of copies.
       	5.2 All claims shall be covered with properly accomplished routing slip.
       	5.3 PU shall prepare the DV only upon receipt of a formal request from the Chief of Office/Service of the employee concerned in the prescribed for a marked annex I.
       	5.4 The sequencing of signature on the DV shall be strictly observed
       
       6. During the last two (2) months of the year, all ROA with the supporting papers shall be forwarded to the Commission on Audit for verification/notation pursuant to Executive Order 228.
       	All and any other issuances by this office contrary to this order are hereby revoked.
       This order takes effect immediately.

</body>								 	
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>