Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
BUREAU OF LICENSING AND REGULATION
Manila
<date>3/4/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 68-As. 1989</docnum>
<subject>REVISED RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE REGISTRATION, LICENSURE AND OPERATION OF HOSPITALS IN THE PHILIPPINES</subject>
<body>
	Sec. 1.	TITLE : These rules shall be known as the “Revised Rules and Regulations Governing the Registration, Licensure and Operation of Hospitals in the Philippines.”

	Sec. 2.  AUTHORITY : These rules and regulations are issued to implement R.A. 4226 (Hospital Licensure Law) consistent with E.O. 119 (Reorganization Act of the Ministry of Health).

	Sec. 3. PURPOSE : These rules and regulations are promulgated to protect and promote the health of the public by ensuring quality hospital service appropriate to its level of health care through licensure and regulation of hospitals.

	Sec. 4. SCOPE : The regulations embodied herein shall apply to any 1.) hospital, government or private; 2.) any institution; 3.)building or place where there are installed beds or cribs or bassinets for twenty-four-hour use or longer by patients in the treatment of diseases, diseased conditions, injuries, deformities or abnormal physical and mental states, maternity cases; 4.) all institutions such as those for convalescence, sanitaria care infirmities, nurseries, dispensaries and such other names by which they may be designated and any clinic or dispensary where there is at least six (6) beds or cribs or bassinets installed for twenty-four-hour use by patients.

	Sec 5. REGULATORY AUTHORITY : The Department of Health through the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation in the Office for Standards and Regulation, shall exercise the licensing and regulatory functions under these rules and regulations.

	Sec. 6. CLASSIFICATION OF HOSPITALS : Pursuant to Sec. 16 of R.A. 4226, hospitals shall be classified as follows : 

		6.1 GOVERNMENT OR PRIVATE : 

Government Hospital – operated and maintained either partially or wholly by national, provincial, municipal, or city government or other political subdivision, board or other agency thereof.

Private Hospital – privately owned, established and operated with funds raised or contributed through donations, or by private capital or other means by private individuals, association, corporation, religious organizations, firm, company or joint stock association.
		
		6.2. GENERAL OR SPECIAL : 

General Hospital – provides services for all kinds of illnesses, diseases, injuries or deformities.	

Special Hospital – provides services for one particular kind of illness/disease or health medical care need. 

6.3 PRIMARY, SECONDARY AND TERTIARY CATEGORY ACCORDING
       TO SERIVES CAPABILITIES OFFERED :

Primary Hospital – equipped with the service capabilities needed to support licensed physicians rendering services in Medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Minor Surgery.

Secondary Hospital – equipped with the service capabilities needed to support licensed physicians rendering services in the field of Medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, General Surgery and other Ancillary Services.
       
Tertiary Hospital – is fully departmentalized and equipped with the service capabilities needed to support certified Medical Specialists and other licensed physicians rendering services in the field of Medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Surgery, their subspecialties and ancillary services.

		6.4 TRAINING AND NON-TRAINING :

Teaching and Training Hospital – departmentalized hospital with accredited Residency Training Program in a specified specialty or discipline. 

	Sec. 7.	MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR EACH CATEGORY OF HOSPITALS : 
The following shall be the minimum standards for service capabilities for each category :

	7.1 Primary

		7.1.1 Administrative Service

		7.1.2 Clinical and Ancillary Service

			7.1.2.1 General Medicine

			7.1.2.2 General Pediatrics

			7.1.2.3 Obstetrics

			7.1.2.4 Minor Surgery

			7.1.2.5 Laboratory

		7.1.3 Nursing Service

	7.2 Secondary

		7.2.1 Administrative Service

		7.2.2 Clinical Service

			7.2.2.1 General Medicine

			7.2.2.2 General Pediatrics

			7.2.2.3 Obstetrics and Gynecology

			7.2.2.4 General Surgery

		7.2.3 Medical Ancillary Services

			7.2.3.1 Anesthesia

			7.2.3.2 Radiology

				7.2.3.3 Laboratory

				7.2.3.4 Emergency and Out-Patient Service

				7.2.3.5 Pharmacy Service

				7.2.3.6 Medical Records

		7.2.4 Nursing Service

		7.2.5 Dietetic Service

		7.2.6 Engineering, Maintenance and Housekeeping Service

	7.3 Tertiary

		7.3.1 Administrative Service

		7.3.2 Clinical Service

			7.3.2.1 Department of Medicine

				7.3.2.1.1 General Medicine

				7.3.2.1.2 Cardiology

				7.3.2.1.3 Gastroenterology

				7.3.2.4 Hematology

				7.3.2.5 Neurology

				7.3.2.6 Infectious Diseases

			7.3.2.2 Department of Pediatrics

				7.3.2.2.1 General Pediatrics
			
				7.3.2.2.2 Neonatology

				7.3.2.2.3 Preventive Pediatrics

				7.3.2.2.4 Infectious Diseases 

			7.3.2.3 Department of Surgery

				7.3.2.3.1 General Surgery

				7.3.2.3.2 Orthopedic & Traumatic Surgery

			7.3.2.4 Department of OB-Gyne

				7.3.2.4.1 Obstetrics

				7.3.2.4.2 Gynecology

			7.3.2.5 E E N T Service

		7.3.3 Medical Ancillary Service

			7.3.3.1 Anesthesia Service

				7.3.3.1.1 Anesthesia Service

				7.3.3.1.2 Pathology Department

				7.3.3.1.3 Radiology Department

				7.3.3.4 Emergency and Out-Patient Service

				7.3.3.5 Dental Service

				7.3.3.6 Pharmacy Service

				7.3.3.7 Medical Records

		7.3.4 Nursing Service

		7.3.5 Dietetic Service

		7.3.6 Engineering, Maintenance and Housekeeping Service

	Sec. 8. LICENSING :

8.1 License -  a formal authorization issued by the Department of Health to a person, association, partnership or corporation to operate and maintain a hospital including its ancillary medical services, such as Pharmacy, Laboratory, Radiology and other health services.

8.2 Provisional License – license issued by the Department Health to a person, association, partnership or corporation to operate and maintain a hospital including its medical ancillary services and other health services for reasonable time to allow the hospital to comply fully with the standards and requirements.

8.3 No hospital either government or private may operate without a proper and valid license issued by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation.

Sec. 9. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS (TECHNICAL STANDARDS) : 
	9.1 All hospitals shall be required to demonstrate compliance with the Technical Standards as a requirement to licensing.

		9.1.1 Personnel – adequate staffing by qualified and trained personnel with physicians and professionals licensed in their respective fields and by trained non-professionals.

		9.1.2 Equipment/Instruments – necessary equipment/instruments to undertake the required services.

		9.1.3 Physical Facilities -  well ventilated, lighted, clean and safe hospital building sufficient to accommodate its activities.

	9.2. The Bureau of Licensing and Regulation shall evaluate compliance with such technical standards in accordance with the minimum requirements for such category of hospital. 

	Sec. 10. THE GOVERNING BODY, ADMINISTRATION AND MEDICAL STAFF :
	There shall be a governing authority for each hospital organization that shall be responsible for the conduct of the hospital as an institution, and in the case of the Department of health, it shall be the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative(s). There shall be a well-qualified Administrator, Director or Chief of Hospital designated to carry out its policies. The practicing physicians in the hospital shall be organized in order to provide quality patient care. There shall be a Chief of Medical Service, or Medical Director, or an equivalent position to organize, coordinate and supervise the hospital medical staff.

	Sec. 11. THE BASIC HOSPITAL SERVICES : The following are the basic services depending on the category of hospitals.

	11.1 Primary Category :

		11.1.1 Administrative Service -  This shall attend to the admission, disposition and discharge of patients including financial transaction and other administrative aspect of hospital operations such as the provisions of drugs and medicines, food and preservation of medical and administrative records.

		11.1.2 Clinical Services – The physicians shall render services in General Medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Minor Surgery. Routine laboratory service should be available.

		11.1.3 Nursing Service – The service should be headed by a registered nurse and shall provide professional nursing care at all times.

	11.2 Secondary Category : 

       11.2.1 Administrative Service - This shall provide the functions of personnel, financial, supply management and general administration of the institution and shall be headed by qualified administrator.
       
       11.2.2 Clinical Service – The medical staff shall render services in general medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology and General Surgery.
       
       11.2.3 Medical Ancillary Service – These are support services which include Anesthesia, Clinical Laboratory, Radiology, Out-Patient and Emergency service, Pharmacy and Medical Records.
       
       	11.2.3.1 Anesthesia Service – There shall be provided an anesthesia service within the hospital headed by a duly qualified Anesthesiologist.
       
       	11.2.3.2 Clinical Laboratory – There shall be provided the services of a duly licensed laboratory including routine chemistry within the hospital.
       
       	11.2.3.3 Radiology Service – There shall be provided a duly licensed x-ray service within the hospital.
       
       	11.2.3.4 Out-Patient Service – An out-patient service maintained for consultations and medical care not requiring hospitalization.
       
       	11.2.3.5 Emergency Service – There shall be a plan to attend to emergency cases and for reception and care of casualties.
       
       	11.2.3.6 Pharmacy Service – A pharmacy service within the hospital shall be headed by a qualified Pharmacist.
       
       	11.2.3.7 Medical Records Service – There shall be a medical records service headed and staffed by a qualified personnel. Records shall be kept where they can be readily referred to by authorized persons. 
       	
       11.2.4 Nursing Service – There shall be an organized service headed by a qualified professional nurse which will ensure the presence of a registered nurse on duty who shall provide nursing care at all times. 
       
       11.2.5 Dietetic Service – Shall be headed by a qualified dietician who shall coordinate with other services of the hospital.
       
       11.2.6 Engineering, Maintenance and Housekeeping Service – There shall be an engineering service which shall provide maintenance of facilities and equipment of the buildings and grounds as well as maintain the cleanliness and sanitation of their physical plant and environment.

		11.3 Tertiary Category ;

			11.3.1 Administrative Service – There shall be an adequate number of skilled, competent personnel both professional and non-professional headed by an qualified administrator to perform the functions of personnel, financial, procurement and other administrative services.

			11.3.2 Clinical Service – The medical services to patients shall be performed by the medical staff appointed by the governing body of the institution. The medical staff is responsible to the patient and to the governing body for the quality of all medical care rendered to the patient and for the ethical and professional practices of its members. It shall be organized along functional lines. There must be written rules and regulations defining the duties, responsibilities and privileges of each member of the staff for its services.

			11.3.3 Medical Ancillary Service – These are support services which include Anesthesia Department, Pathology Department, Radiology Department, Out-Patient Department (OPD), Emergency Service, Dental Pharmacy, Medical Records and Medical Social Services.

				11.3.3.1 Anesthesia Department – There shall be an organized department of anesthesia headed by a competent Anesthesiologist. An adequate staff of competent assistant Anesthesiologist(s), qualified to administer anesthetics shall be available to carry on the work of the department.

				11.3.3.2 Pathology Department – The services of a duly licensed laboratory shall be provided within the hospital. All tertiary hospitals shall be required to have written and updated policy for the adequate provision of safe blood components for their patients. Such hospitals shall require to have a person or a group of person (e.g. Blood Transfusion Committee) designated to perform the duty of promoting voluntary blood donation and monitoring proper utilization of whole blood and its components.

				11.3.3.3 Radiology Department – Duly licensed radiological services shall be provided including radiography and film processing within the hospital.
				11.3.3.4 Out-Patient Department (OPD) – There shall be an OPD maintained in the hospital which may be organized into different clinics, the number of which shall depend on the degree of departmentalization of the medical staff available, hospital facilities and the needs of the community.

				11.3.3.5 Emergency Service – There shall be a plan to attend to emergency cases and for the reception and care of casualties. It shall be headed by a General Surgeon or Internist and shall be provided with facilities to assure prompt diagnosis and emergency treatment. A small recovery or observation room shall be provided.

				11.3.3.6 Dental Service – Tertiary hospitals may or may not have dental service which is headed by a qualified dentist.

				11.3.3.7 Pharmacy Service – There shall be a pharmacy service which is headed by a qualified pharmacist. The pharmacy service shall be within the hospital with adequate space for compounding, dispensing and storage of pharmaceuticals. All tertiary hospitals are required to have Therapeutic Committee and a hospital formulary in generics.

				11.3.3.8 Medical Records Service – This shall be headed and staffed by a qualified personnel. Current and complete clinical records sufficient to validate the diagnosis and to establish the basis for treatment shall be kept for each patient. Statistical reports shall be submitted quarterly to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation. 

	Every hospital shall comply with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations which provide for the registration of births and deaths and the reporting of communicable and other diseases.

				11.3.3.9 Medical Social Service – There shall be a qualified Medical Social Worker to head a unit/service which shall serve as liaison for the hospital and the community. Although it is not required for licensing purposes, it is advisable that one such unit/service be established and maintained to improve hospital patient care.

			11.3.4 Nursing Service – There shall be an organized service headed by a qualified professional nurse which shall ensure the presence of a registered nurse on duty who shall provide professional nursing care at all times. Nursing units and nursing area shall be provided with Nursing Procedures Manual for Guidance of all nursing personnel. Written policies shall be established for all Nursing Service areas within the hospital. Provisions shall be made for the preparation of medications and treatments.

			11.3.5 Dietetic Service – Shall be headed by a qualified dietician and it shall coordinate with other services of the hospital. Working arrangements with the nursing, medical and other services of the hospital shall be established to insure that the needs of patients are met as determined by the licensing agency. Written dietetic policies shall be established as a guide for carrying out dietetic procedures.

			11.3.6 Engineering, Maintenance and Housekeeping Service – There shall be an engineering service which shall provide maintenance of facilities and equipment, of the building and grounds as well as maintain the cleanliness and sanitation of their physical plant and environment. This service in hospital below 100 bed capacity shall be headed by a competent maintenance man and for those from 100 beds and above, by a hospital engineer.

	Sec. 12. PHYSICAL FACILITIES : Upon application for permit to construct, the plans and design shall show compliance with the following requirements for physical facilities needed in accordance with the category and service capabilities of the hospital being applied for.

		12.1 Physical Plant – The construction of a new hospital and alterations or additions to existing facilities shall be made in accordance with plans and specifications prepared by duly licensed Architect or Civil Engineer and approved by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation. Any individual or group planning such construction shall submit final plans and specifications to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation for review and approval with respect to compliance  with the minimum standards prescribed thereof. Final plans submitted shall be in sufficient detail to show the type and location of major items of equipment, the intended use of each room, type and source of utilities and the proposed system of garbage and refuse disposal.  Any changes/alterations in the original plans after construction shall be approved by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation.


			12.1.1 The hospital building shall be adequately ventilated. Patients room shall be of sufficient size to allow no less than 80 square feet of floor space for bed, and designed to allow for passage and work area between beds and at the foot of the bed. Plans and specifications for private rooms shall provide no less than 100 square feet of floor area.

		12.2 Safety and Sanitation – Hospital buildings shall be of such construction so that no hazards to the life and safety of patients and personnel exist. Buildings shall be capable of withstanding weight and elements to which they must be subjected.

			12.2.1 Facilities for maintenance of sanitary standards, including approved water supply and sewerage system, shall be provided throughout the hospital buildings and premises for insuring cleanliness.

		12.3 Maintenance and Planning – All hospital buildings and equipment shall be kept in a state of good repair. Proper maintenance shall be provided to correct or prevent leaking of roofs or walls, loose plaster or uneven flooring, faulty equipment or other undesirable conditions which may be placed in the category of poor maintenance.

		12.4 Surgery and Obstetrics – 

			12.4.1 Surgery – If surgical service is provided, the surgical suite shall be equipped with air conditioning units and shall be also located and organized to prevent through traffic. Equipment, instruments and supplies shall be available to meet the needs for the surgical procedures performed such as anesthetic drugs and supplies to combat shock and hemorrhage, special illumination of the operating field, hand scrubbing and sterilizing facilities. 

	Hospitals providing surgical service shall have facilities available for examination of tissue specimens by a pathologist either on the premises or by arrangement through affiliation, with a duly licensed pathological laboratory.

			12.4.2 Obstetrics – The obstetrical and newborn services shall be in a segregated area of the hospital. The labor room shall be adjacent to the delivery room.

	There shall be available in the Obstetrical Suite, instruments and supplies for uncomplicated and operative obstetrics and for the administration of anesthesia and sterilizing facilities. Facilities for the preparation, examination and transport of patients shall also be provided. 

	Provisions shall be made for the isolation of all obstetrical patients and infants with infections.

			12.4.3 The hospital nursery shall provide an isolation nursery for the use and care of pathological newborn delivered in the hospital. It shall have space enough for supplies and equipment for the safe care of the newborn.

	Reliable means for positive identification shall be made for every infant before leaving the delivery room. Such identification shall remain on the infant until it leaves the hospital.

		12.5 Medical Records – There shall be provided facilities for medical records which shall include a medical records rooms with satisfactory storage area in all hospitals.

		12.6 Nursing – Nursing stations shall be provided in all in-patients areas of the hospital with a ratio of at least one (1) nurse station for every thirty five (35) beds. 

	Provisions shall be made for the storage and preparation of medications including dangerous drugs and treatments. Space and facilities shall be provided for the proper cleansing and storage of nursing supplies and equipment. 

		12.7 Dietetic – Food handling facilities, sanitary preparation and serving meals shall conform with the rules and regulations prescribed by duly constituted health agencies.

	Sec. 13. BASIC REQUIREMENTS :

		13.1 Permit to Construct – No hospital, government or private, shall be constructed unless plans have been approved and construction permit has been issued by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation signed by the Undersecretary of Health for Standards and Regulation. The following are to be accomplished by the owner : 

			13.1.1 Letter of Application of the owner

13.1.2 Application for Permit to Construct a Hospital (BLR  
       Form)

13.1.3 Floor Plans of the physical plant of the proposed 
       hospital (3 copies)

			13.1.4 Feasibility Study

			13.1.5 Endorsement of the Regional Health Director

		13.2 License to Operate - No hospital shall operate or be opened to the public unless it has been registered and a license to operate has been approved by the Undersecretary of Health for Standards and Regulation.

	The following are to be accomplished by the owner :

			13.2.1 Application for registration and issuance of Licensure to 
       Operate a hospital (BLR Form)

			13.2.2 List of Technical Equipment and Instruments

			13.2.3 List of Personnel

	Sec. 14. APPLICATION : The following procedures are hereby prescribed :

		14.1 Permit to Construct – Any person, association, partnership, corporation or government entity desiring to construct, remodel or repair a hospital building shall file with the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation an application on the prescribed form (BLR Form) for a construction permit which shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of floor plans of the hospital plant proposed to be constructed, remodeled or repaired.

			14.1.1 The construction permit shall be issued by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation upon approval of the floor plans and payment of the permit fee. Other building permits as required from the other government agencies shall be obtained. 

			14.1.2 Construction shall be started within the time specified in the construction permit and shall follow the approved floor plan and specification. New construction permit is required if the original permit is revoked due to violation of its terms and conditions or the same expired before the construction has been started.

		14.2 Application for Registration an Initial License to Operate and Maintain a Hospital – An application shall be filed to operate and maintain a hospital with the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation on the prescribed form (BLR Form) after completion of the hospital building. 

			14.2.1 Inspection – Representative of the licensing agency shall conduct an ocular inspection and certify that the applicant has satisfactorily complied with the requisites prescribed in this Act. 

			14.2.2 The hospital shall be registered and the license to its operation and maintenance shall be issued by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation after satisfactory evidence that the minimum standards and requirements for hospital construction has been complied with. A registration fee of One Hundred Pesos (P100.00) and a license fee depending upon the category of hospital shall be paid by the applicant.

	Sec. 15 LICENSE FEES : 

		15.1 A non-refundable fee shall be charged for every application for a permit to construct, for registration of a hospital, or for a license to operate and maintain a hospital both government and private.

		15.2 A non-refundable fee shall be charged for an application for renewal of license to operate a hospital during the first three (3) months of each year.

		15.3 All fees shall be payable to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation to be paid to the Cashier of the Department of Health in accordance with the following schedules :

			1. Permit to Construct	- P 200.00

			2. Registration Fee		-    100.00

			3. For new licenses :

				1. Primary		-    400.00

				2. Secondary 		-    600.00

				3. Tertiary		-  1,000.00

			4. For Renewal of License :
				
				1. Primary		-    200.00

				2. Secondary 		-    300.00

				3. Tertiary		-    500.00

		15.4 A penalty of Two Hundred Pesos (P200.00) for late renewal shall be charged in addition to the renewal fee for all categories of hospital if the application is filed during the next two (2) months after March 31.

		15.5 After the fifth (5th) month, a penalty of fifty pesos (P50.00) per month and every month thereafter shall be charged for late renewal of the license.

	Sec. 16. INSPECTION : Hospital shall be inspected regularly and records made available to determine compliance with the Rules and Regulations.

		16.1 Each licensee shall afford to give the Director of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation (BLR) or his duly authorized representative(s) at any reasonable time opportunity to inspect the hospital.

		16.2 Each licensee shall make available to the Director of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation or his duly authorized representative(s) for inspection, records kept by him pursuant to these regulations.

		16.3 The Director of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation or his representative may be assisted by duly designated experts from professional organization in such inspection.

		16.4 The Director of the Regional, Provincial, City, Municipal Health Office are hereby empowered to report the existence of unlicensed hospitals or any violation of these rules to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation.

	Sec. 17. ISSUANCE OF LICENSE : 

		17.1 The license shall be issued by the BLR and approved by the Undersecretary of Health for the Office of Standards and Regulation (OSR) if the application is found to be meritorious and the license fees duly paid, otherwise the same shall not be approved.

		17.2 A provisional license shall be granted to hospitals for a duration of three (3) to six (6) months in the meantime that all the necessary requirements and standards governing their operations are not fully complied with. 

		17.3 Upon written appeal duly verified by the applicant or the licensee, the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representatives shall conduct an Administrative hearing to determine the justifiability of the recommendation of the Director of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation in denying issuance of license, enclosing therewith a certified copy of the recommendation sought to be reviewed.

	Sec. 18. TERMS AND CONDITIONS :

		18.1 The license is granted on the basis of specific conditions and limitations in compliance with certain requirements as established during the inspection and defined in the issuance of the license.

		18.2 The license as herein granted as well as any right under the license shall not be assigned or otherwise transferred directly or indirectly to an unauthorized party.

		18.3 The Bureau of Licensing and Regulation shall be notified of any changes in ownership, management or name, and an application be submitted for renewal of license. In cases of transfer of location, a permit to construct and an application for new license shall be required.

		18.4 Failure to report in writing of any substantial change in condition of the license may be the basis for suspension or revocation of the license.

		18.5 Separate License Required – Separate license shall be required for hospitals or branches thereof maintained, in separate premises, even though they are operated under the same management, however, separate license shall not be required for separate buildings in the same compound.

	Sec. 19. EXHIBITION of LICENSE AND THE RULES AND REGULATION : The license to operate a hospital shall be in a conspicuous place readily seen by the public. A copy of the Rules and Regulations shall be readily available for guidance of all the staff and personnel of the hospital.

	Sec. 20. EXPIRATION : Each specific license shall expire on the last day of December of the year stated herein.

	Sec. 21 RENEWAL : 

		21.1 License to operate and maintain a hospital shall be renewed every year.

		21.2 Application for renewal of license shall be filed during the first three (3) months of the current year,

		21.3 The Bureau of Licensing and Regulation or the Regional Health Office concerned shall process application for license renewal immediately upon receipt thereof subject to ocular inspection by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation or the Regional Health Officer. The hospital shall continue operation during the pendency of the final action on its application unless otherwise advised or ordered by the Director of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation or Regional Health Officer to cease operation.

		21.4 A license that has not been renewed for a period of two years shall be considered lapsed and the registration shall be cancelled. Application for registration for a new license to operate shall be required before such a s hospital can be allowed to operate.

		21.5 Application for Renewal of License : the following shall be submitted by the owner :

21.5.1 Application for registration and issuance/renewal of 
       license to operate a hospital (BLR Form)

			21.5.2 Annual Statistical Report

			21.5.3 Loss of Technical Equipment and Instruments

			21.5.4 List of Personnel

	Sec. 22. PUBLICATION OF LIST OF LICENSED HOSPITALS : 

		22.1 A list of licensed hospitals according to their categories shall be published periodically and made available to any person, agency or organization for legitimate purpose.

	Sec. 23. MODIFICATION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE  : The terms and conditions of each license shall be subject to amendments to these regulations, as the Secretary of Health may deem necessary.

	Sec. 24. VIOLATIONS :

		24.1 The license to operate a hospital shall be suspended or revoked by the Undersecretary of Health for Standards and Regulation upon violation of the Hospital Licensure Law (R.A. 4226) or the Rules and Regulations issued in pursuance thereto including the commission of the following acts by the persons operating the hospital or persons under their authority :

1. Establishing a hospital without obtaining the necessary permit to construct.

2. Making substantial renovation alteration of the physical structures without obtaining a permit to construct.

3. Operates, manages or maintains a hospital without a valid license to operate;

4. Any material false statement in the application; 

5. Change of ownership, management, name or location without informing the bureau of licensing and regulation in writing.

6. Refusal to allow inspection of the hospital by persons authorized by the Director of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation during reasonable hours;

7. Failure to make necessary correction of deficiencies required by the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation to comply with standards and requirements after due notice.

24.2 Any person who establishes a hospital without first obtaining the 
necessary permit to construct, or operates and manages a hospital without a current valid license from the Department of Health, or violates any provision of these rules and regulations shall be liable of not more than five hundred pesos (P500.00) for first offense and not more than one thousand pesos (P1,000.00) for each subsequent offense. Each day that the hospital shall operate after the first conviction shall be considered a subsequent offense; provided however, owner shall be liable of penalty imposed.

	Sec. 25. INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES OF COMPLAINT : Upon the filing of complaint or charges duly sworn to by person, interested party or corporation against a hospital or any of its personnel to the effect that one or more of such personnel of a hospital have violated or are violating R.A. 4226 or the provision of these rules regulations, the Undersecretary of Health for the Office of Standards and Regulation shall investigate the complaints or charges and verify if the hospital concerned or any of its personnel is guilty of the charges. If upon investigation, a person or persons are found violating the provision of R.A. 4226 or any of these regulations, the Undersecretary of Health for the Office of Standards and Regulation shall suspend for a definite or indefinite period of time or cancel or revoke the license of the hospital without prejudice to taking the case to judicial authorities for criminal action.

	Sec. 26. EFFECTIVITY : These Rules and Regulations shall take effect upon approval and publication in a newspaper of general circulation and supersedes all administrative orders or other issuances inconsistent thereof. 



</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BNEGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
