Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80

<date>9/3/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 62, s. 1989</docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations to Implement Prescribing Requirements under the Generics Act of 1988 (R.A. 6675)</subject>
<body>
Pursuant to Section 9 in relation to Section 6 (a), and 6 (b) of R.A. 6675 known as the Generics Act of 1988, and the pertinent provisions of R.A. 3720 known as the Food, Drugs and Devices and Cosmetics Act, as amended by Executive Order No. 175 s. 1987, R.A. 5921 known as the Pharmacy Act and R.A. 4224 and R.A. 5946; R.A. 4419 known as the Dental Act, R.A. 382 known as the Veterinary Act, and R.A. 6425 known as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972 as amended, the following rules and regulations are hereby promulgated:
Section 1 DEFINITION OF TERMS:
1.1 Prescription is the written order and instruction of a validly-registered physician, dentist or veterinarian for the use of a specific drug product for a specific patient. For the purpose of these Rules and Regulations, the doctor’s order on the patient’s chart for the use of specific drug(s) shall be considered a prescription.
1.2 Generic prescribing is prescribing of drugs or medicines using their generic name(s) or generic terminology.
1.3 Dispensing is the act by a validly-registered pharmacist of filling a prescription or doctor’s order on the patient’s chart.
1.4 Generic Dispensing means dispensing the patient’s/buyer’s choice from among generic equivalent i.e., finished pharmaceutical products having the same active ingredient(s), same dosage form and same strength as the prescribed drug.
1.5 Generic name of generic terminology is the identification of drugs and medicines by their scientifically and internationally-recognized active ingredients or by their official name as determined by the Bureau of Food and Drugs of the Department of Health.
1.6 Drugs means (1) “articles recognized in the current official United States Pharmacopeia- National Formulary (USP-NF), official Homeopathic Pharmacopeia of the United States, official Philippine National Drug Formulary, or any supplement to any of them; and (2) articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or animals; and (3) articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or function of the body of man or animals and (4) articles intended for use as a component of any articles specified in clauses (1), (2) or (3) but do not include devices or their components, parts  or accessories.
1.7 Drug product or medicine is the finished form that contains the active ingredient(s), generally, but not necessarily in association with inactive ingredients.
1.7.1 Prescription or ethical drugs are pharmaceutical products or drug preparations that are to be dispensed only, upon, written order of a validly-registered licensed physician, dentist or veterinarian for the management or treatment of a condition or disease.
1.7.2 Non-prescription or over-the-counter drugs are pharmaceutical products or drug preparations that can be dispensed even without the written order of a validly-registered licensed physician, dentist or veterinarian, for the use of consumers for the prevention or symptomatic relief of minor or self-limiting ailments.

1.8 Dangerous drugs refer to either prohibited drugs or regulated drugs which require a special prescription form, the use of which is monitored by the Dangerous Drugs Board.
1.8.1 Prohibited drugs include “opium and its active components and derivatives such as heroin and morphine; coca leaf and its derivatives, principally cocaine, alpha and beta Cocaine, hallucinogenic drugs, such as mescaline, lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and other substances producing similar effects; Indian hemp and its derivatives; all preparations from any of the foregoing; and other drugs, whether natural or synthetic, with the physiological effects of a narcotic drug.:
1.8.2 Regulated drugs includes sleep-inducing sedatives, such as secobarbital, phenobarbital, barbital, amobarbital and other drugs which contain a salt or derivative of a salt of barbituric acid; any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer, of amphetamine, such as Benzedrine or Dexedrine, or any drug which produces a pharmacologic action similar to amphetamine; and hypnotic drugs such as methaqualone, or any other compound producing similar pharmacologic effects.
1.9 Drug outlets means drugstores, pharmacies, and other business establishments, which dispense or sell drugs or medicines.
Section 2 GUIDELINES ON PRESCRIBING BASED ON PRIOR LAWS
	Prior to the Generic Act of 1988, the following general guidelines on prescribing have been operative. In order to have an integrated implementation of all relevant guidelines on prescribing, these guidelines based on prior laws are restated hereunder:
2.1 Only validly-registered medical, dental and veterinary practitioners, whether in private  practice  or employed in a private institution/ corporation or in the government, are authorized to prescribe drugs. Prescribing by unauthorized persons constitutes illegal practice of medicine, dentistry or veterinary medicine punishable under R.A. 2382 or the Medical Act of 1959, R.A. 4419 or the Dental Act, R.A. 382 or the Veterinary Act.
2.2 In accordance with R.A. 5921, or the Pharmacy Act as amended, all prescriptions must contain the following information: name of prescriber, office address, professional registration number, professional tax receipt number, patient’s/ client’s name, age and sex, and date of prescription.
2.3 For drugs in List A (Annex A) containing the list of Prohibited Drugs and Regulated Drugs as approved by the Dangerous Drug Board (DDB), the following are required:
	2.3.1 The prescriber must have an S-2 license.
	2.3.2 The special DDB prescription form must be used.
	2.3.3 A recording system following pertinent DDB regulation must be observed.
Section 3 ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES ON PRESCRIBING TO IMPLEMENT THE GENERICS ACT OF 1998
	In the addition to the guidelines contained in section 2, the following shall specifically guide prescribing under the Generics Act of 1988:
3.1 Generic names shall be used in all prescriptions.
	3.1.1 For drugs with a single active ingredient, the generic name of that active ingredient shall be used in prescribing.
	3.1.2. For drugs with two or more active ingredients, the generic name as determined by BFAD shall be used in prescribing.
3.2 The generic name must be written in full but the salt or chemical form may be abbreviated.

3.3 The generic name of the drug ordered must be clearly written on the prescription immediately after the Rx symbol, or on the order chart.
	3.3.1 In addition to the generic name, a brand name may also be indicated. In such cases, the following shall be observed:
		3.3.1.1 If written on a prescription pad, the brand name enclosed in parenthesis shall be written below the generic name.
		3.3.1.2 If written on a patient’s chart, the brand name enclosed in parenthesis shall be written after the generic name.
3.4 Only one drug product shall be prescribed on one prescription form.
3.5 In prescribing drugs enumerated in list B (Annex B) which needs strict precaution in their use, the prescriber must comply with the following:
	3.5.1 After the Rx symbol but before the generic name, he must write clearly “(list B)”.
	3.5.2 Hu must ensure that the following information are accurately written on the prescription:
		3.5.2.1 The generic name of the active ingredient(s) and the specific salt or chemical form.
		3.5.2.2 The manufacturer
		3.5.2.3 The brand name, if so desired.
		3.5.2.4 The strength or dose level using units of the metric system (see Annex C).
		3.5.2.5 The delivery mode or delivery system: quick-dissolve, sustained release, etc. and the corresponding appropriate dose frequency or dose interval.
Section 4 VIOLATIVE, ERRONEOUS AND IMPOSSIBLE PRESCIPTIONS
4.1 Violative Prescriptions:
	4.1.1 Where generic name is not written;
	4.1.2 Where the generic name is not legible and a brand name which is legible is written.
	4.1.3 Where the brand name is indicated and instructions added (such as the phrase “no substitution”) which tend to obstruct, hinder or prevent proper generic dispensing.
4.2 What do with violative prescriptions
	Violative prescriptions shall not be filled	. they shall be kept and reported by the pharmacist of the drug outlet or any other interested party to the nearest DOH Office for appropriate action. The pharmacist shall advise the prescriber of the problem and/or instruct the customer to get the proper prescription.
4.3 Erroneous Prescriptions
	4.3.1 Where the brand name precedes the generic name.
	4.3.2 Where the generic name is the one in parenthesis.
	4.3.3. Where the brand name is not in parenthesis.
	4.3.4. Where more than one drug product is prescribed on one prescription form.
4.4 What to do with erroneous prescriptions
	Erroneous prescriptions shall be filled. Such prescriptions shall also be kept and reported by the pharmacist of the drug outlet or any other interested party to the nearest DOH Office for appropriate action.
4.5. Impossible Prescriptions
	4.5.1 When only the generic name is written but it is not legible.
	4.5.2 When the generic name does not correspond to the brand name.
	4.5.3 When both the generic name and the brand name are not legible.
4.6 What to do to impossible prescriptions
	Prescriptions mentioned in 4.5 shall not be filled. They shall be kept and reported by the pharmacist of the drug outlet or any interested party to the nearest DOH office for appropriate action. The pharmacist shall advise the prescriber of the problem and/or instruct the customer to get the proper prescription.
4.7 In all cases enumerated in 4.1, 4.3 and 4.5, the local DOH Office shall be responsible for giving written notice to the erring doctor concerned and for transmitting thru through channels the report of the violation/error to the Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) or to the fiscal’s office for appropriate action.
Section 5 ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
	For violations of Section 4 of these Rules and Regulations, the Secretary of Health shall recommend the imposition of appropriate administrative sanctions by the PRC.
Section 6 CRIMINALITY LIABILITY
	The imposition of the above sanctions does not preclude the institution of appropriate criminal proceedings pursuant to Section 12 of R.A. 6675 known as the “Generics Act 1988”, R.A. 3720 known as “Food, Drugs and Devices and Cosmetics Act” as amended and R.A. 5921 known as “Pharmacy Law” as amended and R.A. 2382 known as the Medical Act of 1959,” R.A. 4419 or the Dental Act of R.A. 382 or the Veterinary Act and R.A. 6425 known as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972 as amended, and other relevant laws, by the Regional Health Office concerned, upon receipt of complaints or reports of violations.
Section 7 TIMETABLE OF IMPLEMENTATION
	In order to give all affected parties adequate time for learning and adjustment, the implementation of these Rules and Regulation shall be in three phases, as follows:
       
Phase 1 Education Drive
	This phase shall be from the date of the effectivity of these Rules and Regulations to May 31, 1989. During this period, the DOH, in cooperation with the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Department of Local Government and the Philippine Information Agency, shall undertake information dissemination and education drive concerning the provisions of these Rules and Regulations as well as the Generics Act of 1988.
	Phase 2 Monitoring of Compliance Without Sanctions or Penalties
	From June 1, 1989 to August 31, 1989, the DOH shall monitor voluntary compliance with the provisions of the Rules and Regulations on Prescribing and Dispensing. During this period, the associations of affected professionals are enjoined to promote compliance in order to achieve a smooth transition to the next phase of full implementation.
	Phase 3 Full Implementation
	Beginning September 1, 1989, the DOH and the other relevant agencies of government shall monitor compliance with these Rules and Regulations and all violations shall be subject to the appropriate sanctions and penalties provided for under these Rules and Regulations and the Generics Act of 1988.
Section 8 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
In case any provision of this Administrative Order is declared contrary to law or unconstitutional, other provisions which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in force and in effect.
Section 9 REPEALING CLAUSE
All Administrative Orders, Rules and Regulations and other Administrative issuances or parts thereof, 
Section 10 EFFECTIVITY
This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in two newspapers of general circulation.
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>