Republic of the Philippines
Department of health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>6/6/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 71  s. 1989</docnum>

 	T 	O     :      All Health Undersecretaries/assistant Secretaries,
 			Bureau Directors/Chiefs of Service, the Medicare, and
 			The Dangerous Drug Board 
<subject>SUBJECT        :    Adjustment of Complaints and  grievances at the Central Office level</subject>	

<body>
 	I. ADJUSTMENT OF COMPLAINTS AND GRIEVANCES
 			At the Central Office level, the adjustment of complaints and grievances between and  among employees or between employee and supervisor should be settled as much as possible within the organizational unit; (Division/Bureau/Semite/Office) which is the focus of such complaints and/or grievances.
 
 			Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35 of Presidential Decree No. 807 and Rule XIII of the Revised Civil Service Law and Rules, the following regulations are hereby promulgated and established to govern the adjustment of complaints and grievances of officers and employees in the Department of Health.
 
 	A. PURPOSE - The grievance procedure is intended to help promote Wholesome and desirable employee relations in-this Department and in the
Bureaus/Services/offices under it and to prevent employee discontent and dissatisfaction.
 
 	B. DEFINITION OF TERMS - For purposes of these regulations, the following
 	are the concepts adopted and used: 
 
 		1. A COMPLIANT means an employee' 3 expressed feelings of dis
 		faction with some aspects of his working conditions.
 		Relationships or status which are outside of his control.
 		2. A GRIEVANCE is a complaint "which has, in the first instance
 		and in the employee's opinion, been ignored, overridden, or
 		dropped without due consideration. 
 		3. The GRIEVAHCE PROCEDURE refers to the method of determining
 		and finding the best way to remedy the specific cause of the
 		Complaint or grievances.
 
 	C.SCOPE - The grievance procedure shall be applied when the disaffection 
 	 arises in the day-to-day working relationships between
 	employees or between employee and supervisor. "It shall not apply
-2-

	to cases of dissatisfaction with official actions, finally taken
	by the Office, nor in disciplinary cases. Complaints and/or
	grievances may refer to any of the following:

		1. Unsatisfactory working conditions;
		2. Improper, tedious or laborious work assignments;
		3. Faulty tools or equipment;
		4. Unsatisfactory personnel and/or work process;
		5. Improper placements;
		6. Improper appreciation of the factors relative to lay-off,
		promotions, salary increase and transfer;
		7. Arbitrary exercise of discretion;
		8. Inter-personnel relations;
		9. Policies, practices, and procedures of particular Units,
		Divisions, Bureaus and/or Offices/Services within this
		scope; and
		10. All other complaints and grievances embraced within this scope.

	D. GUIDING PRINCIPLES – Any officer or employee of the Department shall have the right to present his complaints and/or grievances to the Management and to have his complaints  and/or grievances adjusted in accordance with these regulations; 
		l. An employee shall first discuss his problem informally with.
		his immediate supervisor before considering the filing of a 
		Formal written complaint; 
		2. An employee presenting a complaint or grievance shall be
		assured freedom from coercion, discrimination or reprisal
		and of a speedy and impartial adjustment of such complaint
		 or grievance;
		3. Complaints and/or grievances shall be settled at the lowest
		possible level;
		4. The grievance proceedings shall be as simple as possible
		and shall not be bound by legal rules or technicalities.
		Employing the services of a counsel is not necessary;
		5. The grievance procedure shall be aimed at determining
		what is right, not what is wrong;
		7. The right of employees to appeal decisions on grievances, in
		accordance with the provisions of these regulations, shall
		 not be curtailed.









-3-

 E. PROCEDURE - The Procedure for seeking redress if complaints and grievances
 shall be as follows:

	1.    Oral discussion.  A complaint shall be presented orally in the first instance to 
	the employee's immediate supervisor who shall, within three (3) days from date of presentation inform the employee orally of his decision. In the oral discussion, the following shall be observed:

		a. The gloves shall be at ease. Every effort shall be exerted to make the employee who has 	a, complaint feel at ease during the oral discussion.
		b. The employee shall be encouraged to talk. The employee shall be
		 allowed to tell or explain his side during the oral discussion.
		c. Privacy in discussion. an oral discussion shall be held in a quiet and 
		private	place where the conversation cannot be interrupted or overheard.
		d. The case shall be heard fully. The supervisor shall seek to keep his 
		views and Opinions entirely to himself until after the employee has explained his side.
		e. it definite closure shall be reached At the end of the discussion, the
		 supervisor must be prepared to state his position clearly, accurately, and 
		without any attitude of ill-feeling towards the employee. He need not immediately give a definite decision, but it shall be given within three (3) days from the presentation or the complaint. 

	2.    Grievance in writing. If the employee is not satisfied with the oral decision, he may submit his grievance in writing through his immediate supervisor, who shall forward the grievance with his comments, within twenty-four (24) hours, "to the Chief of the primary unit or to the next higher super-visor as the case may be, who shall within five '(5) days from receipt thereof inform the employee in writing through the immediate supervisor, of his decision provide however, That where the object of his grievance is the Chief of: his Unit or Section or an employee or official in another Unit or Section in the same Division, or the personnel of another Division, the complainant may bring his grievance in writing, direct to his Chief of Division who shall refer the grievance to the other Division Chief concerned for proper action. The Univision Chief concerned shall render his decision within five (5) days from receipt of the grievance: Provided, furs then new, That where the object of his grievance is the Chief. of Division, the complement may present his grievance in writing, direct to the Bureau Director/Service Chief/Head of Office concerned.
		a. If the complement is not satisfied with the decision of his immediate 	supervisor or of the Chief of Division, he may appeal his grievance in writing to the Bureau
		
Director/Chief or Service/Office through his Chief of division who shall forward the some together with any comments he wishes to make within five (5) days from receipt thereof. 

	b. then receipt of the complaint or grievance, the Bureau Director/Chief of Service/Office shall review the issues and resolve such complaint or grievance
	within tax (10) days.


-4- 

	c. appeal to the Department Undersecretary. If the employee is not satisfied with 
	prior decisions relative to his grievance, he may submit through channels his
	grievance in writing to the Department undersecretary concerned who may forth 
	with decide the case or refer it to a grievance committee constituted for the purpose.

	II• EMPLOYEE – SUPERVISOR RELATION COMMITTEE
		If and when the employee is not satisfied with prior decisions on his
	grievance, he may submit thru channels his grievance in writing to the
	department Undersecretary concerned who may immediate decide on the case,'
	or refer the same to the employee-Supervisor Relations Committee constituted
	for the purpose.

		A. Organization at the Central Office level
			There will be one Committee to be established in each of the
		Offices for the five DON Undersecretaries. The Committee for the
		Office of the Undersecretary and Chief of Staff will include the
		Office of the Secretary.
	
		1. Creation and Composition 
			l.l One Chairman		) to be designated by the
			l.2 One permanent member	) USSC concerned
			l.3 Two transient members - one to be chosen by the complainant, and 		the other is the Director of the shrew/Chief of the Service/Head of the Office of the 	primary unit, which is the focus of the complaint/grievance
		2. Modes/Approaches - Understanding the Filipino Worker. To under tend the 		Filipino Worker, we must remember that we ourselves areas such as a 		worker like others. With more rules for the worker to follow and 			comply with the more errors are committed by the worker.

			 2.l Bureaucratic (the legal system) approach
				a) laws 
				-P.D.	807
				- E.0. 180 			which the Filipino	
				-Labor Code 			worker must be	
				(b) CSC rules/regulations	conscious of	
				(c) Office policies






-5- 
		2.2. Non-Bureaucratic (the cultural system) approach
			The customary ways: -
 				(a) Filipino "asal" traits • these are the 
				saligang pamantayan, or the core value, relating to -
			
				-  "Pakikipagkapwa" - individual relationship with each other (the relational 				imperatives)
				
				- "Pakikisama" sa lugar -meaning concerned about, supportive of
				 (for social purposes)
				
				- "Pakikisama-• meaning to be sympathetic with, to assist (for crises purposes)

			(b) Filipino "damdamin" - feelings, sentimentality,
			sensitivity

				(1) "Hiya" --• meaning politeness (for social effect)
				(2) "Amor Propio" --• self-esteem/self-image; refinement of character .
				(3) "Awe" - to symphonize with people in time of crisis .

			(c) Filipino "dangal." • the more imperative:
				
				(1) Bahala (without the "ma") ka, bahala kayo -- this is a personal delegation
				(for social effect)
				(2) Galan (respect) ••- meaning Prospect me? as a human being if you cannot 				respect, my position (for personal effect) .
3) Tang an lob (the axis)
	
	`		3. Guiding principles for the supervisor/manager in grievance
			3.1  Take a. pro-active rather than s preventive attitude on the matter. '
			3.2   Establish a sense of identity with your people, take pride in them, and be 				committed to their welfare
			3.3    Be objective, not subjective; impersonal, not personality; and organization-wise, 			not formalistic.
			3.4   Be group-oriented --- consistent, fair, just and firm in your stand.
			3.5   Above all, reconcile the legal structure with the
			Human values/ the cultural norms.





-6-


	The general rule is:
		First, exhaust all ways and means of the cultural approach. Last resort, the legal approach.
	4. Procedure -
		4.1  The Chairman shall immediately schedule a hearing
		Within a reasonable period during office hours at a suitable time and place.
		4.2   All members of the Committee shall be present during the hearings, and all proceedings 		before the Committee shall be reduced to writing. For this purpose, the
		Committee may avail of the services of any stenographer/s employed in the 				Bureau/Service/Office concerned.
		4.3  The procedures enumerated under to. E. 1. e•-c• of these regulations shall also apply in 
		Committee adjustments of employee grievance.
		4.4  The complainant shall be given ample time for an oral exposition of his. grievance, citing, if 		possible, the management principles or sound personnel practices '
		violated by inactions on his grievance, or the detriment to his rights and privileges or to the 		public-interest if correction is not made on the complained aspect of
		his working condition, relationships or status.
		4.5  The complainant shall not be permitted to dwell on aspects not covered by his grievance in 		writing.
		4.6  The officer or employee affected by the grievance shall be allowed by the Committee ample 		chance. to present his side
		4.7  Both complainant and the respondent or any officer or employee involved shall be allowed		to submit evidence or present witnesses before the Committee hearing.
		4.8  The Committee shall immediately sit in consultation, and shall submit its findings and 		recommendations to the Chief of Bureau/office/Service or to the Department Undersecretary, as 		the case may be, within ten (10) days after termination of the hearing. 

	5. Effectively of Decision • Unless otherwise provided, the decision of the Chief of 	Bureau/Office/Service, the Committee Chairman, or the Department Undersecretary concerned, as the
	case may be, shall take effect immediately, after receipt thereof by the complainant and all parties 	affected.
	6. Administrative Liability - any officer or employee who violates the procedure for seeking redress of 	complaints and grievances as herein prescribed shall be subject to
	administrative disciplinary action.











-7-

		7.Bgsgonsibilitx of the Personnel Officer -All written proceedings and records involving 			complaints and grievances
		shall  be kept by and be the responsibility of the Personnel Officer of the Bureau/Office/Service 		concerned• Certified
		true copies thereof shall, however, be furnished the Department Personnel Officer•


	lll. EMPLOYEE-MANAGEMENT RELATION COMMITTEE

		A.OBJECTIVE 

		1. Main - To enhance the knowledge of government administrators on public sector unionism 		and to develop among them greater understanding thereof and s more positive attitude towards 		unionism.
		2. Specific - To develop awareness on the extent end present state of public sector monism;

			- To be able to understand the value of establishing and observing grievance 				procedures; and 

			- To know the various alternative actions which the management may pursue in the 			event of strike situations.

	B. CREATION/ORGANIZATION OF THE EMLOYEE- MANAGEMÉHT RELATIONS (EMAR) COMMITTEE

		There shall be one EMAR Committee for all Central Offices of the DOH
	
		1. Creation and composition at the Central Office level
			There is hereby created the DOH  Employee-Management Relations (me) Committee 			to handle matters on public sector unionism for its Centre]. Offices.  to be composed
			of' the following: 

				1.1 Undersecretary and Chief of Staff  	- Chairman
					Asst. Secretary for Legal Affairs     - Co-Chairman
				1.2 Legal Officer IV			-Member
				1.3 Chief, Administrative Service 		- Member 
				1.4 Chief, Personnel Division 		-Member 












-8- 

			1.5 One (1) rank-and-file representative (to be voted by DOH employees thru 'a general 			election to be called by the Chairman
			1-6 Two transient members -one to be chosen by complaining employee/s, end the 			other is the Bureau Director/ Service Grief/Head of Office or of the Primary Unit, 			which is the focus of the complaint/grievance.
			 l•7 Secretariat - The Administrative/Per- sonnet Officer of the Administrative 				Assistant and two stenographer or recorders of the Bureau/Service/Office concerned.

 	2. Terms of Office  
		The representatives of the Committee shall sit for a period of two (2) years and may be 		reappointed for another term but not to. Exceed a maximum of two (2) terms.
	
 C.  FUNCTIONS  - The EMAR Committee shall:
 	1. Investigate any reported anomaly or check on any reported grievance of the union concerned;
	 2. Gather evidence in relation to number 1; 
	3.Act. as a continuation body;
	 4.make all necessary efforts to prevent the escalation of grimaces or dissatisfaction from the rank-and-	file;
	 5.Maintain and establish e line communication prevent and/or resolve existing disputes. 
.
D. POWERS  -  The Committee shall;

	 1. Have the power to issue subpoena duces tecum and subpoena the grievance  and such other powers as 	my be necessary 'in the exercise of their functions;
	 2. Possess the authority to implement emotions/evolution to the grievance presented as agreed upon 	between the concerned parties;
	 3. Have the power to adopt contingencies to handle the disputes and/or strikes; and 




















-9-

		4. Have the power to compel the disputing parties to submit their dispute to arbitration in order 		to protect public interest and welfare. 

	E.	 PROCEDURE/MECHANICS IN HANDLING CONFLICT BETWEEN MANAGEMENT 		AND EMPLOYEES 				
	1	. The grievance/conflict may be filed in writing by an individual. The same must be settled first 	at the lowest level normally between the aggrieved employee and his supervisor within five (5) days 	from date of receipt.
	2.In case of failure to resolve the same, the complaint is elevated to the higher level in succession until 	the complaint is filed with the EMAR Committee and finally reaches the agency head for decision on the 	complaint within ten (10) days from date of receipt of Committee's recommendation.
	3.In the event that the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the agency head, the same is elevated 	to the Merit Systems Protection Board of the Civil Service Concession within fifteen (15) days from date 	of receipt of the decision.
	4.Failure to elevate the same within fifteen (15) days will construed as e waiver and the decision of the 	head of the department becomes binding to the employee/s concerned.

`	F.  OTHER  MODES OF SETTLING DISPUIES

		1. Negotiation
			A process whereby representatives of the employees and management meet for the 		purpose of reaching agreement and  how such agreements are to be administered. 

	The following terms and conditions of employment may be negotiated:

	l.l Schedule 'of vacation leave 3
	l.2 'Work assignment of pregnant women)
	l.3 Personnel growth and development;
	l.4, Provision for protection and safety;
	l.5 Physical fitness program;
	l.6 Provision for family planning services for married women;
	l.7 Annual medical/physical examination; and
	l.8 Recreational, social, athletic and cultural activities and facilities.

	The following terms and conditions cannot be negotiated:

	l.1  Increase in salary emoluments and other allowances
	not presently provided for by law;
	1.2 Facilities requiring capital outlays;
	1.3 Car plan;
	l.4 Provident fund;






-10-

	1.5 Special hospitalization, medical and dental services;
	1.6 Rice, sugar and other subsidies;
	l.7 Travel expenses; 
	1.8 Increase in retirement benefits; and
	l.9 Others, such as 
		(a) appointment
		(b) assignment/detail
		(c) classification/upgrading of position
		(d) promotion
		(e) revision of compensation structure
		(f) penalties imposed as e result or disciplinary actions
		(g) selection or personnel to attend seminars
		(h) distribution of work load; and
		(i) external communication linkages
	However, submission of  proposals to the proper authorities to improve the terms and conditions of 	employments is allowed.

	2.Conciliation
		a process whereby e conciliator designated by the Committee brings the representatives of the 	union and management Together, encourages them to discuss their. differences and assists them in 	developing their own proposed solutions.
	3. Mediation 
		a process whereby a third party designated by the Committee as mediator takes the more active 	part in assisting the parties to reach an acceptable solution to the problems
	and helps the conflicting parties develop or bone out with ' an acceptable solution
	4. Arbitration 
		 a process whereby s third party not acting as a court of law, empowered by the Committee to make a decision which disposes of the disputes.

		Kinds of arbitration :
		4.1 Voluntary arbitration
			A method of settling disputes where the parties thereat submit the "controversy" before
	an arbitrator or panel of arbitrators mutely acceptable to both parties who shall render an
	award after proper hearing of the issues involved. The parties abide by whatever award of decision
	the arbitrator renders.












-11-

*text missing*

				A method wherein  *text missing*
			Relations Committee *text missing*
			to submit their disputes to arbitration in wear
			to protect public interest and welfare.

After approval of this Administrative Order and in accordance with the provisions thereof, each of the office: for the five DOH Undersecretaries is hereby directed to organize/establish their respective EMPLOYEE-SUPERVISOR RELATIONS (Grievance) Committee within fifteen (15) dive from receipt hereof
and shall be operational immediately. The organizational set-up of the said Committees should be submitted to the Office of the Chief of Staff, and copies thereof should be furnished the Office for Management Services thru
its Administrative Service.

		Strict and prompt compliance herewith by all concerned is enjoined.


</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


