Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE  OF THE SECRETARY

<date>19/9/1990</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 96, s. 1990</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT:  Guidelines on the Registration of Fixed-Dose Combination Drug Products</subject>

<body>



Pursuant to the provisions of R.A. 3720, also known
as the Food, Drugs and Cosmetics Act, as amended by E.O.
175, the following guidelines are hereby issued relative
to the registration of Fixed-Dose Combination Drug
Products.

Section 1: Definition of Fixed Dose Combination Drug Products.

Fixed Dose Combination Drug Products (FDC's} are
pharmaceutical preparations containing two or more
pharmacologically-active ingredients in a single formulation or dosage form.

Section 2: Scope of these Guidelines

All products classified as FDC's are covered by these guidelines. There are three categories of products included:

2.1 Currently registered products already
recognized and identified by BFAD as FDC's.

2.2 Currently registered products which may later
be classified as FDC's by BFAD.

2.3 Products with pending or for future initial
registration under the category of FDC's-

All these categories of FDC's are covered but the
specific applicability will be defined below.


Section 3: Safety, Efficacy and Quality Criteria

The drug regulatory criteria of safety, efficacy and quality shall be applied by the BFAD to the specific class of FDC's using the following rules:

3.1 The FDC drug product must comply with the
appropriate requirements of A.O. 67 s. 1989
on the registration of drug products.


3.2  The drug establishment seeking to register the
FDC drug product should comply with the
appropriate requirements of A.O. 56 s. 1989 on
the registrations of drug establishments.

3.3 In addition to the above, the FDC drug product
in its final dosage form must be proven to
adhere to all the following criteria:

(a) The active and inactive ingredients
should be pharmaceutically
{i.e. chemically, physically) and
pharmacologically compatible in combination.

(b) The FDC taken as a whole should have
clinical and therapeutic advantage over
the individual active ingredients taken
separately. In this respect, acceptable
clinical and therapeutic advantage
involves more than additive effect,
convenience or better compliance. It
should include such advantages as
complementary or synergistic
pharmacological action or therapeutic
effect, or reduction in adverse drug
reaction.

(c) It must not contain any ingredient whose
proper administration or clinical use
require special adjustments different
from or in conflict with its other
ingredients.

(d) It must not contain active ingredients
with abuse potential (those identified in
List A of A.O. 63, s. 1989), with a
narrow margin of safety and for requires
special precautions in its use and/or
with bioequivalence problems (those
identified in List B of A.O. 63, s. 1989),
and which are banned or not yet
registered in the Philippines.

 
3.4 FDC's that are listed in International
Compendia, such as the United States
Pharmacopeia, British Pharmacopoeia, World
Health Organization Compendia and other
similar listings, and deemed essential by the
Department of Health may be exempted from the
criteria described in 3.3 above

Section 4: Applicability to FDC's With Pending
or for future Initial Registration

4.1 The new and initial registration of all FDC's shall be governed by the above criteria upon effectivity of this Order. At whatever stage of such registrations, provided the
registration certificate has not yet been issued, compliance with the above criteria(Section 3) shall be required prior to
issuance of registration.

4.2 All registration applications of FDC's shall henceforth be required to present the following:

a) A detailed statement stipulating the
therapeutic/clinical rationale for FDC.

b) Information on the pharmaceutical,
pharmacological and therapeutic
properties, and any adverse reaction(s).

c) Clinical documentation to support
efficacy and safety.

d) Bioequivalence studies, where applicable,
to be done on Filipino patients
demonstrating no unfavorable effect on
the bioavailability of any of its active
ingredients.

Section 5: Applicability to Currently Registered FDC's

All currently registered FDC's shall be required to
comply with criteria stipulated in Section 3. In
order to effect the orderly and systematic application of these regulations, the following procedures shall be undertaken:


5.1 Identification of all FDC drug products
currently registered and their classification
into the following use groups and order of
priority for BRAD Review:

PRIORITY I

1. Anti-infectives

2. Anti-asthmatics

3- Cough/cold remedies

PRIORITY II

1. Anti-TB

2. Cardio-vascular preparations

3. Endocrine/metabolic

4. Drugs acting on-central nervous system

PRIORITY III

1.Gastro-intestinal preparations
2.OB/Gyne preparations
3.Musculoskeletals
4.Urinary tract preparations
5.Vitamin-Minerals
6.Eye-Ear Preparations
7.Dermatologicals
8.Others

The classification will be based on PNDF
characterization of a product's active ingredients
and the manufacturer's claims of the nature of drug
action in its product registration as finally
approved by BRAD.

5.2 For every group of FDC's being reviewed, the
BFAD director shall notify the drug
establishments concerned that their registered
product is being reviewed for compliance with
the requirements of this Order. All
establishments with FDC's of the same or
similar ingredients shall be informed of the
impending review.

5.3 Within one week of the receipt of BFAD's
written Notice of Review, the Drug
Establishment concerned shall notify BFAD in
writing, stating, its intended response, which
could be any of the following:

(a) The establishment believes that it may
not be able to meet the Section 3 requirements and prefers to cease production of the same in anticipation of
cancellation of product registration, and
expresses its readiness to do so.
   

(b) the establishment believes it may be
preferable to reformulate its FDC to
insure that it meets Section 3
requirements and expresses its readiness
to do so.

{c} the establishment believes that its
FDC can be proven to comply with the
Section 3 requirements and expresses its
readiness to do so

5.4 Establishments shall be informed that whatever
decision is taken on products similar to their
own shall be applied to all similar
products. If a specific FDC is deemed to be
not in conformity with Section 3 then all
FDC's similar to that product will be so
declared also.

5.5 All establishments are granted a maximum 18
months from date of BFAD Notice of Review to
implement any one of the following courses of
action, in relation to the BFAD Review:

(a) Establishments that decide to cease
production shall do so as soon as
possible. It shall be granted no more
than 18 months to sell its remaining
products. BFAD shall cancel the
registration and withdraw whatever products remain in the market at the end of 18 months.

(b) Establishments that decide to reformulate
shall be granted 18 months to do so. The
application for registration of the
reformulated FDC shall be granted
priority in processing through the
special lane declared in BFAD M.C. No. 5,
s. 1990. During this period, the old
product may be sold. Within 18 months of
the Notice of Review to the Company, the
old formulation's registration shall be
cancelled upon issuance of the new
registration of the reformulated FDC.

(c) Establishments that decide to present evidence of compliance with Section 3 shall be granted 18 months within which a decision by BFAD shall be made. In the first 6 months, the establishment shall be granted the opportunity to present all data, studies and other information to show its product's compliance with Section 3. In the next 6 months, BFAD shall evaluate these submissions with the company allowed supplementary submissions. Then in the last 6 months, a decision shall be rendered by the BFAD. If the FDC is deemed to have complied, then the current registration shall be cancelled and any products still in the market shall be withdrawn.

5.6 Only those products that have been re-registered under this Order shall be issued regular product registration certificates.
All other FDC's, whether already under review or are yet to be reviewed, shall be issued provisional registrations when their current registration expires

Section 6 Effectivity

This order takes effect two weeks after its
publications in two newspapers of general
circulation. This supersedes A.O. No. 133, s. 1985
and A.O. No. 7, s. 1988 relative to the same
subject.

</body>

<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
