Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>29/10/1991</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 112 s. 1991</docnum>
  
  
<subject>SUBJECT; Departmental Policy on Collaboration Between Public and Private Sectors on Health Policies and Programs.</subject>

<body>
Sec. 4. of Executive Order No. 119 provides, among others, that the Department of Health shall "assist, coordinate or collaborate with local-Communities, agencies and interested groups including international Organization in activities related to health."

Sec. 9 (d) (1.) of the same Executive Order identifies the Community
Health Service 'as the staff unit "which shall provide services related to formulating and implementing plans and programs for coordinating with local governments and non—government organizations in health-related activities, program and projects".

This order elaborates on the DOH policy of promoting collaboration between public and private sectors in health policies and programs consistent with the above provisions of E0 119.

1. The DOH regards the Collaboration between the public and private sectors as an essential thrust in the-field of health.
Collaboration shall include consultations, participation, partnerships, alliances and various kinds, levels and scopes of mutual involvements between government entities and entities in the private sector whether operating for profit or for a public purpose. 
 

2. In order to promote collaboration, the DOH has in the past undertaken and shall continue to undertake the following:
(a) the development of mechanisms, for a and opportunities to widen and deepen the contribution of private sector entities in health policies and programs

(b) the identification and removal of obstacles, hindrances and barriers to effective collaboration between DOH and other sectors and groups;

(c) the documentation of positive experiences in public-private collaboration as a means for propagating such collaboration.

(d) the training, organizing and motivating of DOH personnel to be more effective in public-private sector collaboration.

	
3.In order to streamline the staff work in this area at the Central Office, the Community Health Service under the Office of the Chief of staff is hereby designated as the organizational unit in the DOH that shall ensure, Strengthen and sustain public—private collaboration in the health field.

In this regard, the CH8 shall serve as the technical staff assisting other DOH units at central, regional and field levels in adopting measures consistent with the policy of promoting collaboration. It shall also assist parties in the private sector that wish to collaborate more—effectively with the DOH.

As technical staff, CHS shall perform the following tasks:

(a) prepare reports, recommendations, draft guidelines and plans that—would integrate public—private sector collaboration as an essential process in policy formulation and program implementation.

(b) set priorities for identifying, developing and implementing changes in DOH processes that would facilitate effective collaboration.

(c) test document and evaluate specific approaches that feature collaboration as a central strategy.

(d) provide technical, logistical and administrative support to entities working to strengthen collaboration in and with the DOH.

(e) institutionalize successful modes, vehicles and techniques
that induce effective collaboration.

4. All units of the DOH at central, regional and field levels are instructed to assist the CH8 in carrying out the above policies. It must be emphasized that all units are instructed to undertake, on their own initiative, collaborative activities that strengthen health policies and programs the CHS is tasked with accelerating and facilitating this so no prior clearances are required to undertake collaboration but information should be provided to CH8 on the outcomes and the experiences in this field.
This order takes effect immediately;

     
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
