Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>5/5/1992</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 118-A, s. 1992</docnum>

<subject>Subject: THE NATIONAL BLOOD SERVICES PROGRAM (NBSP)</subject>

<body>

BACKGROUND:
	Blood for transfusion is needed in the emergency treatment of patients with acute blood loss, during major operations and to replace deficient blood components. There is a shortage of blood as demonstrated by the disparity between 600,000 units (1% of population) compared to 500,000 units collected in 1990. More significantly, only 30% of blood is collected from voluntary or replacement donors. The Department of Health has been entrusted with the task of safe guarding the quality of the Blood supply through the Blood Bank Law (R.A. 1517). However, to stimulate more voluntary blood donation to alleviate the blood shortage, the Department of Health, Philippine National Red Cross and Philippine Blood Coordinating Council formulated the National Blood Service Program.


2. POLICY 
	In consonance with Department Circular No. 99, s. 1987 (Declaring Basic Policies on Blood and Describing Measures in Support of Such Policies) and Department Order No. 339-K, s. 1988 (Creation of the Committee on National Blood Services Program), it is the policy of the Department of Health to plan, organize and implement the National Blood Services Program in the Philippines to provide an adequate, equitable and safe supply of blood and blood products. The Bureau of Research and Laboratories (BRL) under the Office of Standards and Regulation is the Central Office primarily responsible for NBSP. All DOH agencies, the PNRC and its Blood Centers, the PSCC, hospitals, professional associations, schools and other cooperating organizations shall be responsible for the implementation of the program activities.
3. NATIONAL BLOOD SERVICES PROGRAM
3.1 Vision 
	Blood and its components shall be available, accessible and affordable to all patients who need them by motivating enough people who are willing and able to donate blood voluntarily to facilities, to blood enters with the capabilities of recruiting and screening donors, collecting and processing blood and distributing them equitably all over the country.

3.2 General Objective:
	To ensure an adequate and equitable supply of safe blood and blood products to patients who need them.
3.3 Specific objective:
3.3.1 To increase the number of blood donations through the promotion of voluntary blood donation.
3.3.2 To provide facilities for the recruitment, screening and collection of blood from the regional to the district level.
3.3.3 To upgrade laboratory facilities at national and regional level for the processing, distribution and transfusion of blood.
3.3.4 To provide training to health personnel for the proper screening and selection of donors, collection and processing of blood.	
3.3.5 To promote the maximum utilization of limited blood resources.
3.3.6 To encourage research in various aspects of blood donation, processing and utilization

3.4 Policies
	3.4.1 The National Blood Services Program shall be undertaken by the DOH, PNRC, hospitals and other organizations interested in blood donation.
	3.4.2 All blood transfusion shall be medically indicated and shall utilize blood component therapy
	3.4.3 Voluntary blood donation shall be promoted through an organized and sustained public education program.
	3.4.4 The welfare of donors shall be protected by regulating the frequency of donation
	3.4.5 The provision of blood is a medical service and should be made available on a non-profit basis
	3.4.6 The cost of providing blood should be reimbursed to the institution providing the service, either by the family, government or non-governmental organization
	3.4.7 The education and training of health professionals shall consist of the proper selection of donors, collection and processing of blood and the optimal utilization of blood products.
	3.4.8 Each tertiary hospital shall have a written policy for the provision of blood for its patients to be monitored by a blood transfusion committee
	3.4.9 The establishment and operation of blood banks and centers shall be regulated by the DOH through the BRL pursuant to the Blood Bank Law (R.A. 1517) and its Rules and Regulations.
	3.4.10 Data on donor recruitment, processing of blood and its components, resolution of immunohematologic problems, the clinical and public health effects of blood transfusion and administrative aspect of blood banking shall be promoted in academic institutions, hospitals and blood banks.

3.5 Strategies:
	3.5.1 Blood Supply
		3.5.1.1 An organized and sustained public for the promotion of voluntary blood donation shall be planned and implemented by the DOH, PNRC, PRCC, mass media and other interested organizations.
		3.5.1.2 Blood replacement programs shall be promoted in hospitals.
		3.5.1.3 Blood collection facilities shall be established in regional hospitals, Medical centers, provincial, district and municipal hospitals.
		3.5.1.4 Blood collecting facilities of the PNRC shall be upgraded at regional and provincial levels.
		3.5.1.5 Mobile blood collection units shall be deployed in each region
		3.5.1.6 Donor registries for donors with rare blood types shall be established.
	3.5.2 Blood Processing, Distribution and Utilization
		3.5.2.1 Blood centers shall be established in regional hospitals and medical centers and provincial hospitals of the DOH
		3.5.2.2 Blood processing facilities of the PNRC shall be upgraded at regional and provincial levels.
		3.5.2.3 Cold chain facilities shall be made available for the transport of blood and blood products
		3.5.2.4 An immunohematology referral center for blood banking problems shall be established in the BRL
		3.5.2.5 Plasma fractioning facilities shall be made available to be supported by plasma collection centers to provide blood products.

       3.5.3 Integration
		3.5.3.1 The National Blood Services Program shall be given an integral part of the Laboratory Service Program and shall be in support of the Hospital Development Program
		3.5.3.2 A Committee on National Blood Services Program shall be formed under the Office for Standards and Regulation consisting of representatives of the DOH, PNRC, PRCC, government agencies professional associations and other interested organizations.
		3.5.3.3 Regional Blood Council shall be established in each region to plan and implement regional blood programs. When feasible, provincial/city blood councils should be established in provinces/cities for the same purpose.
		3.5.3.4 Blood Bank facilities (government, private and PNRC) shall be linked in a network in each region/province/city to maximally utilize blood resources.

	3.5.4 Regulation
		3.5.4.1 The minimum requirements for the establishment and operation of blood banks/centers shall be promulgated by the Bureau of Research & Laboratories through the Rules and Regulations and Technical Standards issue pursuant to the Blood Bank Law (R.A. 1517).
		3.5.4.2 Blood bank facilities and laboratories shall be monitored by the BRL through periodic inspection and quality control tests.
		3.5.4.3 Annual reports on the quantity of blood and blood products collected, processed, dispensed and discarded shall be submitted by blood banks and hospital laboratories to the BRL.
		3.5.4.4 The maximum rates for blood and its products shall be prescribed by the BRL in consultation with appropriate professional societies. The fees shall be based on actual cost including expenses for recruitment of donors, collection, processing, storage and transport of blood with reasonable allowance for spoilage and professional service rendered.
		3.5.4.5 Commercial blood bank outlets shall be phased out

	3.5.5 Training and Education
		3.5.5.1 information on the benefits of blood donation shall be included in the curriculum of schools at the primary, secondary and college levels.
		3.5.5.2 The training of medical, technical and other health professionals shall be done in cooperation with professional societies, medical and other health professional schools and hospitals.
		3.5.5.3 Blood bank seminars shall be conducted by the PRCC in cooperation with the BRL and PNRC on the following topics:
	a. Donor recruitment, screening and selection;
	b. Blood donation, processing and compatibility testing
	c. Blood storage distribution and inventory control
	d. The appropriate use of blood transfusion including blood component therapy
	e. The collection and utilization of autologous blood; and
	f. investigation of suspected transfusion reactions.
	
	3.5.6 Research 
		3.5.6.1 Funds shall be requested from the DOH, PCHRD and other donor agencies to be allocated for blood bank research
		3.5.62 Blood Banks, hospital laboratories, medical schools and other institutions shall be encouraged to formulate and implement research projects on technical, clinical and administrative aspects of blood donation and transfusion.

	3.5.7 Legislation   
	Legislation on the following shall be obtained:
		3.5.7.1 Promotion of voluntary blood donation and collection in the community
		3.5.7.2 The inclusion of voluntary blood donation, its rationale and benefits in the education curricula.
		3.5.7.3 A policy that the provision of blood is a medical service and not the sale of a community.
		3.5.7.4 The provision of facilities and logistics for blood donation and transfusion
		3.5.7.5 The operation of blood bank facilities on a professional and non-profit basis

3.5.8 Monitoring and Evaluation
		3.5.8.1 reports on the quantity of blood and blood products collected, processed and dispensed by blood banks/centers and hospitals shall be collated by the Bureau of Research and laboratories
		3.5.8.2 The agencies of the Department of Health and Philippine National Red Cross shall submit reports on the upgrading of their facilities and training activities of health personnel on blood donation and transfusion to the Bureau of Research & Laboratories
		3.5.8.3 Data on public education activities shall be submitted by the PBCC, PNRC and other concerned organizations to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories
		3.5.8.4 The committee on National Blood Services Program shall evaluate the accomplishments of the Program summarized by the PRL in comparison to the targets set as input into the next planning cycle.


3.6 Implementing Agencies
The roles of the different agencies involved in the Program:
	3.6.1 The Bureau of Research & Laboratories, within the Office for Standards and Regulation, shall be the Department of Health unit primarily involved in policy formulation, program planning, monitoring and coordination in the area of blood supply and usage.
	The BRL shall:
		3.6.1.1 promulgate a set of standards that will apply to all the blood banks/centers in the country, both for the collection, processing and utilization of blood.
		3.6.1.2 monitor both the supply and distribution of blood products to ensure national self-sufficiency and prevent exploitation by commercial interest
		3.6.1.3 determine the true need of a certain region for blood and blood products on the advice of the Regional Blood Center chief

3.6.2 The Philippine National Red Cross Blood program will coordinate closely with the regional blood councils with regard to the provision of the blood supply of the different regions and mapping out of operational plans. This will prevent competition for the same donor population and ensure proper and equitable distribution of blood and blood products. Furthermore, the PNRC shall send its surplus plasma to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories for fractionation and shall have access to plasma derivatives whenever needed.

3.6.3 the regional Health Director/Provincial and City Health Officers and Chiefs of Regional/Provincial/City Blood Councils in their respective areas. They shall assist in the planning, implementation and coordination of local blood programs through contributions of manpower, facilities, logistics and funds as appropriate to provide an adequate supply of safe blood in the community.
3.6.4 The Regional/Provincial/City blood councils shall plan and implement a program of donor recruitment and selection, collection and the processing and distribution of blood and blood products in their respective areas.
	The different provincial and district hospitals through their stationary and mobile blood collecting stations shall augment the main supply obtained by the regional blood center to ensure the blood supply of the whole region on a regular basis.
	The local blood councils together with community and political leaders, civic and religious organizations, cause-oriented and consumer groups, business sectors and mass media will hold regular and sustained educational campaigns on a national, regional and local scale utilizing government and private facilities such as press, radio, television, films, etc., to communicate with the public at all levels including children.

3.6.5 The Philippine Blood Coordinating Council will assist in the training activities and proper dissemination of accurate information regarding voluntary donation and utilization of blood. 
	The council will assist in setting-up , collaborating educational programs on good transfusion practice for undergraduate and post-graduate medical and paramedical students, as well as physician-users.

3.6.6 The Bureau of Research and Laboratories (BRL), shall receive the excess plasma collected by the DOH Regional and Philippine National Red Cross Blood Centers. The BRL shall arrange for the fractionation of such plasma locally or overseas. Blood products are then made available to the different regions for distribution according to medical needs.
3.6.7 the Philippine Society of Pathologists, Philippine Society of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Philippine Association of Medical Technologists and other professional societies shall assist in the recruitment and training of blood bank physicians and other health personnel.
3.6.8 Training and continuing education seminars for health professionals shall be held in cooperation with the Philippine Medical Association, medical specialty societies , Philippine hospital Association and private hospitals
3.6.9 The assistance of government agencies such as the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, Department of Social Welfare and Development, Department of Interior and Local Government, Department of National Defense and the Philippine Information Agency shall be obtained in the education of the Public regarding the benefits and advantages of voluntary blood donation
4. ORGANIZATION OF THE NAATIONAL BLOOD SERVICES PROGRAM
	The National Blood Services Program shall be implemented by the Committee on National Blood Services Program which shall be under the Office for the Undersecretary of Health for Standards and Regulation. The committee shall consist of representatives of Bureau and Services in the Department of Health, the Philippine Blood Coordinating Council, professional associations and non-governmental organizations which are concerned with blood donation and blood transfusion.
	A secretariat shall be designated to support the Committee. Committees on various aspects on blood donation and transfusion shall be formed.
	A regional Blood Council consisting of representatives of various sectors, both government and private shall be formed in each region. It shall plan and implement a Regional Blood Program supported by Regional Health Office and Regional Hospital/Medical Center. The Chief of Regional Health Laboratory shall act as the action officer of the Regional Blood Program. Various committees on public education, professional education and blood collection and replacement program shall be formed to undertake the projects.
	Similarly, multi-sectoral provincial blood councils and city blood councils shall be formed in each province and city. This local council shall plan the local blood program in the community.
	These local blood councils formed in the context of Administrative Order No. 112, s. 1991 (Departmental Policy on Collaboration Between Public and Private Sectors on Health Policies and Programs and being multi-sectoral in character shall be considered as non-governmental organizations (NG)s)

5. funding 
5.1 Budgetary appropriations for the National Blood Services Program shall be included in the regular annual budget of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories
5.2 Other funds allocated for the National Blood Services Program from the DOH and other national agencies shall be sub-allotted to the Bureau of Research & Laboratories.
5.3 Grants and donations from national or international institutions both government and private shall be placed in a trust fund that shall be administered by the BRL.
5.4 Funds for the NBSP may be disbursed to agencies both government and private participating in the NBSP in accordance to the work and financial plan previously approved.
5.5 Regional and other local blood councils, as non-governmental organizations, shall maintain their own financial records and report to their respective donor agencies as required. They shall render an accounting of the utilization of funds that have been contributed by government agencies to the agencies concerned.

6. REPEALING CLAUSE
	All orders, Circulars and Administrative issuances which are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

7. EFFECTIVITY 
	This Order shall take effect immediately. 
</body>
<sign>ANTONIO PERIQUET, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

