Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND. RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ, MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NOS. 111-6105 & 711-6061
<date>May 19, 1992</date>
<doctype> DEPARTMENT CIRCULAR</doctype>
<docnum>No. 76-A, s. 1992</docnum>

TO	:   Undersecretaries of Health, Bureau and Regional Directors, Chiefs of Offices, Services, Regional, Provincial Hospitals/Unit Heads Provincial Health Officers, District Health Officers,  Municipal Health Officers, Public Health Nurses and Midwives and others concerned.
<subject>SUBJECT:   Guidelines on Rooming-In, Breastfeeding and Breast milk Feeding</subject>

<body>
	Ministry Circular No. 9-A s. 1983 institutionalized rooming in in all government hospitals but no clear standard have been set. After 9 years of implementation, it has been noted that rooming in is practiced widely in all government hospitals but there are certain routine procedures and practices during delivery and immediate newborn care which cause undue delays in rooming-in and interfere with the normal initiation and establishment of breastfeeding.
       In May 1990, selected Pediatricians and Obstetricians trained on Lactation Management from selected hospitals were convened in a workshop to discuss these problems and propose the best standard procedures to overcome these difficulties.
            These guidelines incorporate outputs of the workshop and the experiences and improvements made in the past two years on the practice of rooming-in. It covers standard procedures for mother and child care starting at the prenatal period up to at least 6 months postpartum. 
       Every facility providing maternity services and care for newborn infants is expected to follow these guidelines which should be translated into clearly stated breastfeeding policies of the hospital. Policies should be routinely communicated to all core staff. The salient features of this policy should he visibly posted in all areas which serve mothers, infants and children particularly in the Maternity Wards, Pediatric Wards, Infant Special Care Units and the Antenatal Care Services.










GUIDELINES ON ROOMING-IN, BREASTFEEDING 
AND BREASTMILK FEEDING

1. At the Antenatal Services
1.1 From the first antenatal visit, carefully assess the attitudes, beliefs, knowledge and experiences of the mother and her family in relation to infant feeding.
1.2 Examine the breast for any anatomical malformation that would interfere with breastfeeding for example inverted nipples. Give clear advice on possibility of breastfeeding in spite of malformation.
1.3 Provide the parents with adequate information on infant feeding including the benefits of breastfeeding the proper management of lactation and the importance of an adequate diet during pregnancy.
2. During and Immediately After Delivery:
 2.1	Immediate Bonding:

After a normal spontaneous vaginal delivery:

Place the baby on the mother’s chest or abdomen immediately after delivery, after cleaning its airways, so that they can have skin-to-skin and eye contact. Assist the baby to latch onto the breast if it is crying. Leave them to bond together for at least 30 minutes keeping an eye on their comfort and congratulating the mother for a successful pregnancy and delivery.

After delivery by Caesarian Section:

Give the baby to the mother to hold and caress for at least, 30 minutes as soon as the mother wakes from the anesthesia which can be within 2-4 hours after delivery. This may be done even while the mother is still in the Recovery Room.
	
       2.2	Rooming-In: (See Annex 1 for definition of terms)
a. All well babies delivered vaginally without complications shall be roomed-in within 1 hour after delivery.
b. All well babies delivered by caesarian section without complications shall be roomed-in within 4-6 hours after delivery.
c. All roomed-in babies must be breast-fed or given breast milk.
d. For complicated births (sick baby, sick mother or both are sick), babies shall be roomed0in as soon as medical conditions permit. While the baby is not yet roomed-in, deliver breast milk by other methods (see 3.1).

2.3	Support to the Mother:
a. Teach mothers how to correctly position and attach the infant to the breast. Correct positioning prevents sore nipples.
b. Convince mothers to breastfeed exclusively on demand up to 6 months and teach them how to empty the breast by manual expression to increase their milk supply. Mothers who know manual breast milk expression are more likely to continue breastfeeding even when they have to go back to work.
c. Teach parents and relatives not to bring feeding bottles into the hospital and not to give the baby any water or other juices.

Do not forget to congratulate them every time they respond well to instructions and counseling.

3. Routine Procedures for Feeding the Neonate
3.1	Breast milk especially colostrum, must be given to all neonates who can tolerate oral feeding. Breast milk can be given by direct breastfeeding or in certain conditions, by orogastric or nasogastric tube, by cup or by dropper.
	
	Do not use feeding bottles because these cause "nipple confusion“ (see Annex 1).
3.2	Do not give prelacteal feeds to newborns such as sterile water and glucose water; neither should milk formula be introduced.
3.3	In rare cases necessitating complementary feeding, food can he provided by teaspoon dropper or small cup, never by feeding bottles.
3.4	Other foods or fluids may be given in addition to, or in place of, breast milk only for the following medical indications:
a. Special milk formula for infants with inborn errors of metabolism, i.e., galactosemia, phenylketonuria and maple-syrup urine disease.
b. Water for infants with increased insensible water loss, for example during phototherapy for jaundice when increased breastfeeding fails to provide adequate hydration.
c. Specific supplements for infants with very low birth weight (&lt 1000 gms) or who are preterm (&lt 32 weeks gestation age at birth):
• Multivitamin supplementation specifically vitamins A, D, C and possible E; may be given in the first week of life.
• Iron supplementation: recommended only after 2 months of infant life.
d. Specific fluids for infants with severe dysmaturity with potentially severe hypoglycemia or who require therapy for hypoglycemia and who do not improve through increased breastfeeding or by being given breast milk.
e. Milk formula for infants whose mothers are undergoing drug therapy when a drug is known to be very harmful to the breastfed infant such as anticancer drugs (see 5.4 and Annex 2).
3.5	The infant should be permitted to suck freely at the breast, frequently and without any fixed timetable. Mothers should wake their babies for breastfeeding of they sleep more than 3 hours.
3.6	No artificial teats nor pacifiers (also called dummies or soothers) should be given to breastfeeding infants.

4. Special Procedures for Neonates in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU):
Colostrum is very valuable in the immediate care of these sick neonates because of its high content of much needed antibodies. Furthermore, being a biologic liquid, it is non-irritating, easily absorbed and well tolerated. Therefore, colostrum must be given to babies.

4.1	Preterms &lt 32-34 weeks gestation can be tube-fed almost immediately with a small amount of colostrum (1-2 ml Every 1-2 hrs).
a.	Give colostrum feeding using 5 ml/kg/day as early as 4 hours of life (generally at 8 hours). Orogastric tube is preferred to nasogastric tube.
b.	With stabilization of vital signs and/or attainment of gestational age 32-34 weeks in preterms, initiate breast milk by cup or breastfeeding.
4.2	Asphyxiated infants generally cannot be fed for 24-96 hours because of other complications as aspiration, or cerebral hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. They should receive intravenous nutrition during the critical period.

	As soon as they can tolerate it, feed colostrum. It can be protective against necrotizing enterocolitis, Institute oral feeding after the critical period.
4.3	Hyperbilirubinemia
a.	Continue EBM feeding by tube or cup at NICU or breastfeed during feeding time at the NICU.
b. 	Phototherapy may be given in the rooming-in section.
c. 	Discourage water or dextrose water as much as possible. Avoid formula supplements.
4.4	Infants who have self-limited acute illnesses such as fever, upper respiratory infections, diarrhea or Contagious diseases like chickenpox should continue to breastfeed. 
4.5	A Mother and Child Room (MFR) should be set-up near the NICU to enable the mother To breastfed her sick baby at any time. The room should be comfortable and attractive for mothers.

5. Breastfeeding During Maternal Illness and/or in Special Conditions.
5.1	Common breast problems, such as engorgement, sore nipples, mastitis:
	a. Engorgement:
• Avoid breast engorgement by immediate breastfeeding on demand and complete emptying of the breast by manual expression.
• Relieve engorgement by manual emptying of the breast.
b. Sore Nipples:
• This is usually due to bad breastfeeding position.
• Correct the breastfeeding position, that is, see to it that: the baby has all of the areola into its mouth, his mouth and chin are close to the breast; and the baby is taking slow deep sucks.
• Continue breastfeeding on the sore nipple. Absence or greatly reduced pain on the sore nipple is a good sign that the breastfeeding position has been properly corrected.
• Do not put creams, ointments or other medications on the nipples.
c. Mastitis:
• Continue breastfeeding on the affected breast.
• The suppression of lactation (ablactation) by giving Bromocriptine (parlodel) to relieve engorgement and mastitis is no longer practiced.
• If the mother does not want the baby to suck from the breast, show her how to express milk manually.
• Select antibiotics which will not interfere with breastfeeding, such as: penicillin, erythromycin or trimethoprim.
5.2	For mothers with mild to moderate medical problems such as malaria, STD, diabetes, congestive heart disease (CHD) class T-III or TB sputum (-) or doubtful infectivity:
	Follow routine procedures like other mothers and treat illness without stopping breastfeeding.
a. Immediately bond at the delivery room
b. Room-in and breastfeed immediately during feeding time at mother’s bed or give EBM by cup as necessary.
5.3	For mothers who are severely ill such as those with eclampsia, CHD class IV, severe infections or severe diabetes:
	
Give EBM by cup. Eclamptic mothers can breastfeed 12 hours after the last seizure.
	5.4	Drug Therapy:
a.	Avoid drugs that may interfere with initiation and establishment of breastfeeding (see Annex 2).
b.	Select drugs and other medications which are not contraindicated during breastfeeding.
c.	Any unnecessary medication during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided. Indiscriminate excessive use of sedatives, analgesics and anesthetics should be avoided as this may prevent the mother from establishing close contact with her infant immediately after delivery and may diminish the newborn infant’s abilities to suckle.
d.	General advice regarding the use of drugs:
• The mother should take the medication during or immediately after breastfeeding.
• Whenever possible, long-acting drugs should not be used.
• Choose the medication which is secreted in the smallest amount in milk.
• Always watch the baby for changes in sleeping habits and feeding patterns as well as for fussiness and skin rashes.

6. Manual Expression of Breast milk and Mini-Milk Banking (see definition of terms)
6.1	The staff should be able to teach all mothers the technique of manual expression of breast milk especially if her infant is unable to breastfeed directly or if there is a need to maintain lactation should she be separated from her baby some time.
6.2	Each hospital must be required to have adequate facilities for banking expressed breast milk (EBM).
6.3	EBM should be stored in individual containers (not pooled), labeled properly with the name of the donor, the date and the time of collection. The EBM shall be preferably used by the donor’s own child.


7. Discharge and Postpartum Care
7.1	General Advice for the Mother:
a.	Advice mothers on how to care for her breast and maintain lactation through exclusive breastfeeding on demand.
b.	Inform mothers about follow-up care provided by the hospital or refer them to any breastfeeding support groups.
c.	No “discharge packs” containing items that may interfere with establishment of breastfeeding such as feeding bottles should be given.
d.	Appointments should be made for follow-up visits.
e.	Advise mothers on nutritional requirements during lactation

8. Information, Education, Communication and Training
8.1	The hospital staff must undergo training on lactation management and neonatal care and shall develop an in-service lactation management training program of at least 18 hours with 3 hours clinical practice tor the continuing education of the staff.
8.2	A parent education plan with the attached standard breastfeeding messages (Annex 3), starting at the antenatal services up to the follow-up care hi the mothers should be available and implemented.
8.3	Special counseling sessions must be scheduled by the best staff available for mothers most likely to stop breastfeeding and have breastfeeding problems such as primigravidas, mothers who previously bottle-fed, Working mothers, or mothers who have problems with breastfeeding.
8.4	The Department of Health shall provide breastfeeding education materials for dissemination to hospitals. Hospitals however, should also develop their own educational materials.
8.5	The hospital should be able to provide follow-up support for maintaining breastfeeding such as lactation brigades, hotlines, and volunteer groups.
8.6	The hospital should establish a network with the surrounding communities, health centers and private hospitals and clinics for the promotion, protection and maintenance of breastfeeding.

9. Prohibitions/ Regulations
9.1	No milk formula shall be kept on stock in the hospital, especially in the pharmacy; any necessary formula must be purchased by the patient outside the hospital or if really needed, can be purchased by the hospital as an emergency purchase.
9.2	All milk formula shall be by prescription only. No formula prescription shall be made without the approval of the Chief of Pediatrics or his/her designate based on the medical indication for the neonates. She/he shall be responsible for ensuring that the indications far formula prescriptions are medically acceptable.


9.3	No feeding bottles, artificial teats. And pacifiers Shall he allowed into the hospital newborn section in the nursery, pharmacy. etc.), Parents and relatives must be clearly informed about this and the hospital security must be mobilized to enforce this.
9.4	Sale of infant formula and other breast milk substitutes, feeding bottles, artificial teats and pacifiers shall not be allowed in the hospital pharmacy and in other newborn sections.
9.5	No medical representatives shall be permitted in hospital wards.
9.6	No posters, gifts, samples from milk companies, donations or supplies of infant formula shall be allowed anywhere in the hospital with or without brand or company names or other logos or labels which directly or indirectly relate to a product.
9.7	The use of "professional service" representatives, "mother craft nurses" or similar personnel for teaching parents or staff, provided or paid for by manufacturers or distributors, shall not be permitted. (E.O. 51, Sec 7 (d)).
9.8	No continuing education activities like training, workshops, conferences and similar activities shall be conducted without clearance from DOH through the regional Health Directors. No research projects, clinical trials and fellowships sponsored/assisted by manufacturers and distributors of products covered by the Milk Code shall be conducted without prior approval by DOH through the Undersecretary for Public Health Services, Technical or financial assistance shall be continuously monitored and documented.

Please be guided accordingly.





DEFINITION OF TERMS

1. Well Babies: Babies with Apgar score 7-10, usually term and older than 34 weeks gestational age, with no respiratory distress, asphyxia, severe congenital malformation, or other severe clinical problems.
2. Sick Babies: Babies with Apgar score below 7, usually preemies, younger than 34 weeks gestational age, lighter than 2,000 grams and with severe medical problem such as respiratory distress, asphyxia, severe or life threatening congenital anomaly, etc.
3. Neonates needing temporary formula supplements added to breast milk: These are neonates which fail to gain weight for at least 4 weeks. They are often also premature or low birth weight babies (LWB) but not all preterm or LBW babies need special formula supplements. Special supplementation is only until neonate reaches 2.5 kilograms. Do not forget to maintain good breast milk production.
4. Expressed Breast milk (EBM): Milk expressed from a lactating woman, either manually or with the aid of breast pumps. EBM given to a neonate may be from its own mother or from another mother.
5. “Latching On”: when a baby takes enough of the nipple and the areola into his mouth to from a “teat”.
6. Second Stage of Labor: stage of labor from full dilation of the cervix to expulsion of the baby.
7. Exclusive breastfeeding: giving only breast milk and no other extra fluid during the first 4-6 months of life.
8. Pre-lacteal or Starter Formula: a formula feed which is given to a newborn soon after birth or before putting the newborn to the breast. Normally pre-lacteal foods are sugar-water, tea or other traditional beverage given before any meal of milk.
9. Wet Nursing: feeding a newborn from another mother’s breast when its own mother cannot breastfeed, for a short period or longer.
10. Mini-milk Banking (Philippine style): Facilitates for milk collection, storage, distribution and utilization.
11. Low Birth Weight (LWB): Babies with birth weight 2,500 grams.
a. Preterm – babies delivered after 37 completed weeks of gestation.
b. Term – babies delivered after 38-42 weeks of gestation.
12. Very Low Birth Weight: Infants with birth weight & lt 1500 grams.
13. Extremely Low Birth Weight: Infants with birth weight &lt 1000 grams.
14. Small for Gestational Age: Infant’s weight is below 2 SD below mean for gestational age or below the 10th percentile.
a. Symmetric SGA – proportionally growth retarded
b. Asymmetric SGA – more profound loss in weight as compared to other body measurements.
15. Large for Gestational Age: Infants with birth weight above 2 SD or above 90th percentile for gestational age or &gt 4000 grams.
16. Post Term: infants born after 42 weeks of gestation.
17. Rooming-In: Refers to the practice of placing the newborn in the same room as the mother right after delivery up to discharge to facilitate mother-infant bonding and to initiate breastfeeding; the infant may either share the mother’s bed or be placed in a crib beside the mother.
18. Ablactation: or “Stopping lactation”: It was a frequent practice two decades ago to suppress lactation by taking hormones (estrogen-testosterone combination) as management for breast engorgement or mastitis.
19. Mother and Child Room (MCR): A separate room located beside the nursery but considered part of the nursery unit where the mother can breastfeed her baby.
20. Nipple Confusion: Difficulty in feeding from a breast after using a feeding bottle. Sucking through a rubber teat is easier since it is long and does not have to be pulled-out while if sucking from the breast the baby needs to stretch the nipple out and take enough of the areola into his mouth.























LIST OF DRUGS THAT SHOULD NOT BE TAKEN BY NURSING MOTHERS

1. Amiodarone
2. Amethopterin
3. Bromocriptine
4. Cimetidine
5. Chloramphenicol
6. Chlorthiazides
7. Clemastine
8. Clofibrate
9. Cyclophosphamide
10. Corticosteroids – Cortisone, Dexamethasone, Hydrodocortisone, Methylprednisolone, Triamcinolone
11. Dextroprpoxyphene
12. Ergotamine – Ergot and derivatives, Methysergide
13. Gold salts
14. Ethosoximide
15. Gamma Benzene Hexachloride
16. Hypnosedatives – Chlorosepate, Diazepam, Nitrazepam
17. Indomethacin
18. Iodine
19. Methimazole
20. Laxatives – Cascara, Danthron, Phenolphthalein
21. Lithium
22. Maprotiline
23. Phenindione
24. Phenylbutazone
25. Badiopharmaceuticals – Radioiodine
26. Thiouracil
27. Reserpine
28. Sulphonamides
29. Tinidazole
30. Sex hormones – Ethinylestradiol, Mestranol, Estradiol, Stilbestrol

For Mothers with G6PD Deficient Infants:
1. Co-trimoxazole
2. Fava beans
3. Nalidixic Acid
4. Nitrofurantoin
5. Sulphonamides
6. Sulphasalazine



STANDARD BREASTFEEDING MESSAGES

Advice at the antenatal period:
1. Breast milk alone is the best possible food and drink for your baby in the first 6 months of life. Other milks do not contain as much nutrients in the right amounts and in the proper form for easiest digestibility
2. Breastfeeding has the following benefits for both mother and baby:
a. It contains all the essential nutrients needed for the adequate nutrition and growth of the baby.
b. Breast milk especially colostrum protects child against many childhood diseases like diarrhea and respiratory infections.
c. Breastfeeding fosters a closer mother-child relationship
d. Breastfeeding helps mother prevent post-delivery hemorrhage, delays pregnancy and protects mother against cancer of the breast.
3. The first milk called “colostrum” is thick and yellowish because it is full of protection against common infections. Give it to your baby.
4. Babies should start to breastfeed as soon as possible after birth.
5. Frequent sucking is needed to produce enough breast milk for the baby’s needs.
6. Bottlefeeding can lead to serious illness and death.
7. The size and shape of the breasts do not matter. Small breasts and large breasts both produce perfect milk in sufficient quality.

Advice during and immediately after delivery:
1. It takes a few days for the milk to come in. The breast may feel empty but it does not mean that there is no milk.
2. Colostrum is exactly what a baby needs for the first few days. Do not throw it away.
3. The baby does not need milk supplements, glucose, water or anything else.
4. Frequent sucking at the breasts helps the milk to come in and it is the best way to build up your milk supply.
5. Let the baby suck as often as he wants and as long as he wants.
6. Let the baby finish the first breast before offering him the second. Start on one side for one feed and the other side for the next feed.
7. It is not necessary to wash the breast before every feed.
8. Sucking at night helps to keep up the milk supply.
Advice before discharge:
1. Continue breastfeeding at home.
2. More sucking makes more milk.
3. For any breastfeeding problem, return to the hospital, or go to a nearby health center or any available breastfeeding support group.
4. Give expressed breast milk to your baby if returning to work.

Advice for the following weeks:
1. Continue with exclusive breastfeeding until the baby is at least 6 months old.
2. Do not give early supplements – they can cause diarrhea and interfere with breastfeeding.
3. Breastfed babies may not pass a stool every day. This means he is using up all the nutrients in milk.

</body>
<sign>ANTONIO O. PERIQUET</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>