Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80

<date>30/6/1993</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 18 s. 1993</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Establishment and Operation of Revolving Funds for the Bureau of Food and Drugs.</subject>

<body>
PURPOSE: This Order is issued to prescribe the general guidelines and related procedures for the establishment and operation of a Revolving Fund from the income not exceeding PESOS FIVE MILLION (₱5,000,000) derived from the registration of products and licensing of establishments and other related fees or income to cover expenses exclusively for quality and safety assurance of food, drugs, devices and cosmetics pursuant to Sec. 11, Special Provision, Republic Act 7645 General Appropriation Act for CY 1993.

DEFINITION OF TERMS:

1. Quality and safety assurance of food, drugs, devices and cosmetics - refer to activities of BFAD on ensuring the safety, efficacy, and quality of processed foods, drugs, devices, diagnostic reagents and cosmetics, including the quality and truthfulness of information about these products in labels, advertisement and promotional materials, undertaken thru inspection and licensing of establishments such as manufacturers, traders, distributors, importers, exporters, wholesalers and retailers; product evaluation and registration, product laboratory testing, approval of product labels prior to commercial distribution and monitoring of product advertisement and promotional materials.

2. Revolving Fund - Consists of receipts derived from business type activities of departments, bureaus, offices or agencies authorized by law to be self-perpetuating and liquidating to cover operational expense of the specific activities of the agency subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulation.

GENERAL GUIDELINE:

1. Income of BFAD not exceeding PESOS FIVE MILLION (₱5,000,000.00) Pesos derived from the registration of products and licensing of establishments and other related fees or income shall constitute the Revolving Fund to be used exclusively to cover the operating expenses necessary for quality and safety assurance of food, drugs, devices and cosmetics.

2. The availment of such income shall be subject to a Special Budget pursuant to Section 35, Book VI, Executive Order No. 292 (Administrative Code of 1987).

3. The collecting officer shall issue official receipts for all types of income collected as stated in Item 1 hereof and shall be deposited in a government depository bank under a separate bank account.

4. Interest income earned from the Revolving Fund in the bank shall be remitted to the National Treasury.

5. The Director of BFAD shall submit to the Department of Budget and Management a Quarterly Report of Income and a Quarterly Report of Expenditure, and other reports that may be prescribed by fiscal agencies of the government copy furnished the Office of Management Services of the Department of Health.

SPECIFIC GUIDELINES:

1. INCOME CATEGORY

The following type of Income Category shall constitute the Revolving Fund:

A. Fees and Charges for registration of food, drugs, device and cosmetics products.
B. Fees and Charges for batch certificate and commodity clearance.
C. Fees and Charges for laboratory analysis/examination of food, drugs and cosmetic products.
D. Fees and Charges for licensing of food, drugs, devices and cosmetics establishments.
E. Income from sale of products of Bureau of Food and Drugs operational activities such as but not limited to: Reference standard; experimental animal, publication of administrative and technical documents.
F. Other fees and changes authorized under RA 3720 as amended and its implementary rules and regulations.

II. TYPE OF EXPENDITURES

The fund shall be utilized to augment the funds of the agency appropriation for undertaking quality and safety assurance activities to cover the following specific expenditures:

1. Laboratory chemical reagents and supplies
2. Office supplies and materials
3. Light, water and communication services
4. Repair and maintenance of BFAD facilities
5. Printing and binding or reports/document
6. Traveling expenses
7. Repair and maintenance of equipment
8. Information, education and communication including training, seminar and workshops of personnel
9. Honorarium of medical, allied para-medical, legal and other professional/experts
10. Contractual services
11. Capital outlay for infrastructure including construction of buildings and facilities procurement of equipment

III. ACCOUNTING SYSTEM AND PROCEDURE:

The accounting system and procedure on the establishment and operation of the Revolving Fund for BFAD shall be in accordance with COA No. 9194 and other pertinent rules and regulation prescribed by fiscal agencies of government.
</body>

<sign>JUAN M. FLAVIER, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
