Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80

<date>08/16/1993</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 19-A S. 1993</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Establishment and Operation of Revolving Funds for the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine</subject>

<body>
PURPOSE: This order is issued to prescribe the general guidelines and related procedures for the establishment and operation of a Revolving Fund from the income not exceeding TWO MILLION PESOS (₱2,000,000.00) derived from royalties and other related fees or income for the use and sale of research products and other scientific technologies pursuant to Section 7, Special Provision, Republic Act 7645, General Appropriation Act for CY 1993.

DEFINITION OF TERMS:

1. Scientific technologies- refers to and includes but not limited to the following:

A) Special Laboratory Analysis and Procedures
B) Sale of research products
C) Training Workshop
D) Rental of scientific facilities and equipment (e.g. lecture rooms, auditorium and residence hall)

2. Revolving Fund - consists of receipts derived from business-type activities of departments, bureaus, offices or agencies authorized by law to be self-perpetuating and liquidating to cover operational expenses of the specific activities of the agency subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

GENERAL GUIDELINES:

1. All income not exceeding Two Million Pesos (₱2,000,000.00) derived from royalties and other research produces and other scientific technologies shall constitute a Revolving Fund to be used exclusively to cover the expenses necessary for research purposes.

2. The availment of such income shall be subject to a Special Budget pursuant to Sec. 35, Book VI, Executive Order No. 292 (Administrative Code of 1987).

3. All proceeds from the use and sale of research products and collection from other related fees shall be accounted for as a Revolving Fund to be deposited in a government depository bank under a separate bank account.

4. Interest income from the Revolving Fund shall be remitted to the National Treasury.

5. The Director of Research Institute for Tropical Medicine through the Secretary of Health shall submit to the Department of Budget and Management a Quarterly Report of Income and Expenditures, copy furnished the House Committee on Appropriations and the Senate Committee on Finance and the Office of the Financial Management Service of the Department of Health.

SPECIFIC GUIDELINES

1. INCOME CATEGORY

A. Income from the use and sale of research products and other scientific technologies.

a) Research Products

1. Diagnostic Reagents
2. Reference Materials (e.g. mounted specimens, cell cultures)

b) Scientific technologies refer to the technology transfer activities of RITM such as training including rental of scientific facilities and equipment. (e.g. lecture rooms, auditorium, residence hall)

B. Fees collected from special procedures primarily used for research purposes, to include among others those listed in the attached appendix.

II. TYPE OF EXPENDITURES

The fund shall be utilized to augment the funds of the agency appropriated for research purposes to cover the following expenditures:

1. Laboratory chemical reagents and supplies
2. Office supplies and materials
3. Light, water and communication services
4. Repair and maintenance of RITM facilities
5. Printing and binding or reports/documents
6. Traveling expenses
7. Repair and maintenance of equipment
8. Information, education and communication including training, seminar and workshops of personnel
9. Honorarium of consultants and other professional/experts
10. Contractual services
11. Overtime services
12. Capital outlay for infrastructure including construction of buildings and facilities, procurement of equipment.

III. ACCOUNTING SYSTEM AND PROCEDURE:

The accounting system and procedure on the establishment and operation of the Revolving Fund for RITM shall be in accordance with COA Circular No. 91-349 dated January 18, 1991 and other pertinent rules and regulation prescribed by fiscal agencies of government.
</body>

<sign>JUAN M. FLAVIER, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>