
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
 

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND. RIZAL AVENUE. STA. CRUZ. MANILA, PHILIPPINES TEL NO. 711-6080



<date>13/4/1993</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 11A, s. 1993</docnum> 

T O: All Officers and Employees under the Office of the Secretary, Undersecretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Bureaus, Services, Special Hospitals, Regional Health Offices, Provincial and City Health-Offices, Districts Hospitals, Sanitaria and Projects, Units and others concerned.

<subject>SUBJECT: Merit Promotion Plan_(MPP) in the Department of Health</subject>

<body>
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 82, Book V of Executive Order No. 292, otherwise known as the ”Administrative Code of 1987”, Resolution No. 83—843 promulgating the revised rule on promotion, CSC Memorandum Circular No. 8, s. 1979 as amended by the Memorandum Circular No. 18, s. 1988 and Memorandum Circular No. 88, s. 1989, this Merit Promotion Plan (MMP) is hereby established for the guidance of all concerned.

Section 1. OBJECTIVE

       It is the policy of this Department/Bureau to strictly adhere to the merit principle' of promoting employees on the basis of their relative qualification and competence to perform the duties of the vacant position. In this regard, this Department‘s Merit Promotion Plan aims to:

1.1 Establish a promotion system that is characterized by strict observance of the merit principle in the selection of employees for promotion to higher positions in the career service;

1.2 Create equal opportunities- for advancement to all qualified and competent employees in the Department;

1.3 Provide a guide for a speedy and fair adjudication of protests of employees against promotions.

Section 2. SCOPE 4 This Merit Promotion Plan shall cover all positions in the DOH, Bureaus, Services, Special Hospitals under the-Department classified under the first and second levels of the career service, including those in the regional/and or field offices; 

Section 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS

As used in this Order, the following terms shall mean:

3.1 Agency - region, bureau, office, service, project, hospital, hoard, council directly under or attached to the Department of Health.

3.2 Appropriate Civil Service Eligibility — the eligibility resulting from a civil service examination given by the Commission, or with its assistance or collaboration, or which by specific provisions of law/decree or by declaration of the Commission is deemed suitable for the position to be filled.

3.3 Career Service — category of service in the Philippine Civil Service characterized by entrance to positions 'based on merit and fitness to be determined as far as practicable by competitive examinations, or based –on highly technical qualification, opportunity for advancement to higher career positions, and security of tenure.

3.4 Commission - refers to the Civil Service Commission.

3.5 First Level — includes clerical, trades, crafts and custodial service ”positions which involve non—professional or sub-professional work in non-supervisory or supervisory capacity requiring less than four years college work.
 
3.6 Second Level — includes professionals, technical and scientific positions which involve professional, technical and scientific work in a non—supervisory or supervisory capacity requiring at least four years of college work.

3.7 Next- in-Rank Position-refers to a position which by reason of the hierarchical arrangement of positions in the Department or Agency, is the nearest degree of relationship to a higher position, taking into account the following: (1) organization structure/s as reflected in the approved organization chart/s; (2} classification and/or_ functional relations ship; (3) salary and/or range allocation; and {4) geographical location.

The next—in-rank positions must be shown in the CSC approved System of Ranking Positions (SRP).

3.8 Occupational Group — a series of classes or positions in the same occupation or occupational areas and arranged by level of difficulty and responsibility.


3.9 Merit Promotion - a systematic method of selecting personnel for advancement or promotion on the basis of their qualifications, fitness and ability to perform the duties and assume the responsibilities of the position being filled.

3.10 Promotion - the advancement of an employee from one position to another with an increase in duties and responsibilities as authorized by law and usually accompanied by an increase in salary.

Promotion may be from one department or agency to another or from one organizational unit to another in the same department or agency.


3.11 Promotional Line—up - is a listing of incumbents of positions next— in-rank to a vacancy as well as those who, though not next—in—rank, are deemed qualified and competent together with all necessary information about each incumbent.


3.12 Qualification Standard — express the minimum requirements for a class of positions in terms of education, training and experience, civil service eligibility, physical characteristics, physical fitness and other qualities required for successful performance of the duties and responsibilities of a position.

3.13 Functional Relationship — shall mean the correlation between the position to be filled and the position to be considered next—in—rank taking into consideration the duties and responsibilities of both positions.

3.14 Geographical Location — shall mean the location of the position to be filled and position/s to be considered next in—rank to the same. If the position to be filled in the first level, the determination of the next—in-rank positions may be limited in a particular Region/Office/Department/Bureau where the position is

       For second level positions, however, the determination of the next in rank positions should be on an agency— —wide basis regardless of the location of the position.

3.15 Open Positions - refer to those positions that do not have any positions next—in—rank or residual positions of each level or group which may be filled by lateral/vertical entry.

3.16 Qualified Next—in-rank — refers to any employee appointed on a permanent basis to a position previously determined to be next—in—rank to the vacancy proposed to be filled who meets the requisites for appointment thereto as previously determined by the appointing authority and approved by the Commission.

3.17 Superior Qualifications — shall mean an outstanding relevant -work experience or training appropriate for the position to be filled. - It shall include an outstanding performance representing an extraordinary level of achievement and commitment in terms of quality and time, technical knowledge and skill ingenuity, creativity and initiative, and demonstration of exceptional Job mastery in all areas of responsibility.

Section 4. BASIC POLICIES
4.1 On Promotion

4.1.1  In the selection of personnel for the department or agency, the appointing authority shall be given a wide latitude of discretion, in the exercise of which, however, he shall be guided by the Civil Service law and rules, and the policy guidelines on promotion embodied in this Administrative Order. Provided, he shall not be precluded from appointing employees who possess special qualifications not found among those within the organization, as exception to the next—in-rank rule.

4.1.2 Whenever a position in the first level or second level becomes vacant or is newly created, it shall be filled by promotion except;

- The lowest position in an occupational group which in the exercise of sound discretion of the appointing authority may be filled by an appointment of a person not in the government service who possesses an appropriate civil service act.
- Positions which cannot be filled by promotion due to the absence of qualified employees in the Department or agency

4.1.3 II Whenever a position in the first level or second level becomes vacant, all employees within the Department or Agency, who are, qualified and competent, shall be considered for promotion.

4.1.4 Preference, however, shall be given to the next-in-rank employees who is the most competent and qualified and who has the appropriate civil service eligibility. In cases where all the next-in-rank employees meet the requisites for the positions, preference shall be given to the employee in the organizational unit where the vacancy occurs, or should there be none, in other agencies or offices in the DOH.

4.1.5 Whenever a position in the second level becomes-vacant and incumbents of next—in-rank positions are deemed not qualified for appointment to the vacancy, incumbents of first or second level positions who are competent, qualified, and who possess the appropriate civil service eligibility may be considered for promotion to the second level position although their positions are not next—in—rank;

4.1.6 Positions which cannot be filled by promotion due to the absence of qualified employees in the Department, or Agency, shall be filled by transfer of present employees in the government service, by reinstatement, by reemployment of persons separated through reduction in force or by appointment of persons who are qualified and possess the civil service eligibility for the position.

4.17 In determining the degree of competence or qualifications of an employee, performance shall be given more weight to make merit more meaningful, No employee shall be considered for promotion unless his performance is at least very satisfactory.

4.1.8 An employee who has a pending administrative case shall be disqualified for promotion during the pendency thereof.

       If found guilty, he shall be disqualified for promotion for a period based on the penalty imposed as prescribed by the Commission.

       A pending Administrative Case shall be construed as follows:

       4.1.8.1. When the appointing authority has already filed a formal charge; or
       4.1.8.2. In case of a complaint of a private person, a prima facie case is already found to exist by the disciplining authority. 

4.1.9 An employee who holds a next-in—rank position who is competent and qualified, possesses an appropriate civil service meets the other conditions for promotion shall be promoted to the higher position when it becomes vacant.

4.1.10 When the existing vacant position cannot be filled in accordance with the above guidelines, the employee who is occupying the next lower position which is in the same occupational group or, where none is available, in other functionally-related occupational group in the same organizational unit should first be considered for promotion. Provided, however, that the said employee meets all the qualification requirements and the appropriate service eligibility necessary for thereto.

4.1.11 In the case of new positions, except those in the lowest level, the same shall preferably be filled by competent and qualified employees occupying existing next in rank positions in the same organizational unit where the new positions belong. Should there be none, qualified employees from the other offices in the positions.

4.1.12 In case of positions in newly by promotion or recruitment, but preferably by promotion of qualified and competent personnel 'possessing appropriate civil service eligibilities.

4.13 The incumbent of a position that has been reclassified .or upgraded due to increase in duties and responsibilities shall be appointed thereto if he is qualified and he possesses the appropriate civil service eligibility for the position.


4.2 For the Selection Boards


4.2.1 The Selection Board of the Department or Agency shall have the following functions and responsibilities:

4.2.1.1 Formulate criteria for evaluating qualifications of employees considered for appointment/promotion in accordance with the guidelines on recruitment;

4.2.1.2 Adopt a formal screening procedure;
4.2.1.8 Make systematic assessment of the qualifications of candidates for appointment/promotion;

4.2.l.4 Conduct tests and interviews;

4.2.1.5 Recommends to the appointing authority the employee who may not be considered for promotion; and

4.2.1.6 Recommend appropriate actions to be taken for employees not considered for promotion;

4.2.1.7 Inform candidates for appointment/promotion of the criteria and the procedure on promotion.

4.2.2 Composition of the Selection/Promotion Board

4.2.2.1 I For the first and. second level position

On the Department or agency level:

a} An official of the-department/agency directly responsible for personnel management.

b) A representative of management

c) A representative of organizational unit which may be an Office, Department or Division, where, the vacancy is;

d) The representative of rank and file employees, are from the first level and one from the second level who shall both be chosen by the duly registered/accredited employee association in the department or agency. The former shall sit during the screening of candidates for vacancies in the first level, while the latter shall participate in the screening of candidates for vacancies in, the second level. In cases where there are no employees associations in the department or agency, the representatives shall be chosen at large by the employees through a general election to be called for the purpose.

On the Regional Level:

a) The Chief/Head of the Administrative Office/Unit

b} A representative of rank—and—file employees who may be chosen by the employees thereat 
c} A representative of the organizational unit where the vacancy is

The CSC shall no longer appoint representatives to sit as members in said Selection/Promotion Board, however, the CBC Field Office may be consulted to clarify relevant issues on Civil Service Law and Rules.

4.3 The area of selection for purposes of promotion to positions of Medical Center chief, Chief of Hospital, Provincial/City Health Officer, may be Department-wide or region—wide depending upon the circumstances.
However, preferential consideration will be given to the candidate physician who has been for three (3) or more years in a hardship post or place of assignment, provided he is qualified and meets the qualification requirements for the position involved.

 

 

4.4 For promotional appointment to chief of a district hospital preferential consideration may be given to the candidate physician with surgical capability, provided he is qualified and meets the other requirements for the said position.

4.5 Whenever a position in the first level becomes vacant, the employees in the department or agency who occupy positions deem to be next—1n-—rank to the vacancy and who are competent and qualified shall be considered for promotion. In the second level those employees in the government service who occupy next— in—rank positions and who are competent and qualified shall be considered for promotion to the vacancy.

4.6 Reasonable and valid standards and methods of evaluating the qualifications and competence of employees competing for promotion. to the same position shall be established and applied fairly and consistently.

4.7 Lack of confidence shall not be accepted as a special reason for disqualifying an employee for promotion. The special reason must be real and substantial to be considered sufficient for his disqualification.

4.8 Policy on Promotion of Government Employees who are on Scholarship Grants pursuant to CSC MC No. 15 s. 1992 as follows: 

4.8.1 Employees who are incumbents of next-in-rank positions who meet the qualification requirements for the position to be filled and who are on scholarship grants either here or abroad may be considered for promotion.

4.8.2 For purposes of promotion, the performance rating of the employee for the last rating period prior to the scholarship grant shall be used as the basis for the promotion. Each performance rating should at least be Very Satisfactory.
4.8.3. The specific policies of the department of agency such as academic standing as a factor in the consideration- for promotion, date of assumption to duty, effectivity of promotion and others, may be subject to a collective negotiation by the duly accredited employee association, the head of the agency may create a committee with a representative of the rank and file employee to decide on the matter.

4.9 Effectivity of a contested Promotional Appointment

       An appointment though contested shall take effect immediately upon its issuance if the appointee assumes the duties of the position and the appointee is entitled to receive the salary attached to the position. However, the appointment, together with the decision of the department head shall be submitted to the Commission for appropriate action within 30 days from the date of its issuance otherwise the appointment becomes ineffective thereafter. Likewise, such appointment shall become ineffective in case the protest is finally-resolved against the protester, in which case he shall be reverted to his former position.

Section 5 RESPONSIBILITIES
	
The Personnel -Division/Department shall be responsible for the publication and dissemination of copies of the Merit Promotion Plan and its Annexes to all Department/Bureau personnel after approval thereof by the civil Service Commission. Also, they shall see to it that the proposals for promotions are in accordance -with the provisions of the Merit Promotion Plan.

Section 6.  GENERAL PROCEDURES ON PROMOTION

The following procedures shall be observed in filling any vacant position whether in the first or second level of the career service.

 

.6.1 The Human Resources Management Officer shall post in three (3) conspicuous places in the department/bureau/office for a period of ten (10) days a complete list of all vacant positions in accordance with CSC MC No. 27,s. 1991 (Rules Implementing Republic Act No. 7041, requiring the Regular Publication of Existing Vacant Position in Government Offices. 

       The HRMO may also issue a Memorandum to all employees of the Department/Bureau informing them of all the vacancies to ensure that all interested and qualified employees can apply for the vacant position/s.

6.2 The Head of Office/Department/Division where the vacancy exists, guided by the approved qualification standards of the vacant position/s, shall submit to the Human Resource Management Officer the names of officials and employees from their Office/Department/Division who are competent and: qualified for promotion. From the list submitted, the Head of Office/Department/Division may indicate his choice to fill the vacancy.

6.3 The Human Resource Management Officer, on the basis of the System of Ranking Positions and personnel qualification index, shall identify other employees within the Department/Bureau who are deemed qualified and competent for promotion.

6.4 The Human Resource Management Officer taking into consideration the qualification standards/job requirements of the vacant position shall make a preliminary evaluation of, the qualification of all candidates and submit a promotional line-up to the Personnel Selection Board.

In preparing the promotional line—up, the following steps shall be taken:

6.4.1 Listing of qualified candidates:

	A list of employees within the Department/Bureau who are qualified for promotion, to the vacancy together with the incumbents of positions next—in—rank shall be drawn up. The list shall also contain comparative information of their education and training, civil service eligibility, performance rating, experience and outstanding accomplishments, physical characteristics, personality traits and potential.

6.4.2 Evaluating the candidates:
	To determine the comparative competence and qualifications of the candidates for promotion, they shall be compared .on the basis of the' following factors:
6.4.2.1  Performance — This shall be based on the last performance rating of the employee. No employee shall be considered for promotion unless. Such performance rating is at least Very Satisfactory.

6.4.2.2 Education and/or Training — These shall include educational background and the successful completion of training courses, scholarships, trainings grants and others. Such education and/or training must be relevant to the duties of the position to be filled.

6.4.2.3 Experience and Outstanding Accomplishments — These shall include occupational history, work experience and accomplishments worthy of special commendation.

6.4.2.4 Physical Characteristics and Personality Traits — These refer to the physical fitness, attitudes and personality traits of the individual which must have a bearing on the position to be filled.

6.4.2.5 Potential — This is an estimate or prediction of an employee’s capacity and ability to perform the duties of the position to be filled and those of higher or more responsible positions in the line of promotion. The prediction shall be based on factors 6.4.2.1 to 6.4.2.4 above, i.e. past performance, educational qualifications, and/or training, past work experience or occupational history and outstanding accomplishment, physical condition, attitude and aptitude and all other factors that may help in predicting the employee’s ability to efficiently perform the duties of the position.to which he shall be promoted and other more responsible positions in the line of promotion.

6.5 The Personnel Selection Board shall then evaluate the qualifications of those employees included in the promotional line-up. In determining the degree of competence and qualifications of an employee, Section 5 of Resolution No. 83—343 should be taken into account.

6.6 The Board shall then determine en banc the list of employees recommended for promotion from which the appointing authority may choose the employee to be promoted. In preparing the list, the Board shall see to it that the qualifications of employees recommended for promotion are comparatively at par and that they are the best qualified from among the candidates.

6.6.1 In the case of Regional' Offices where authority to appoint has' not been delegated to the Regional director, the Regional Personnel Selection Board shall submit to the Secretary/Director a list of candidates endorsed by the Regional Director from among whom the
Secretary/Director shall select the person to be promoted. The Secretary/Director may in his discretion, refer the list of candidates submitted by the Regional Personnel Selection Board to the Central Office for further screening when the position  to be filled is on a Department/Bureau-wide basis. In case where the position to be filled is in the Regional Office and the authority to appoint is also delegated to the Regional Director, the list of candidates prepared by the Regional Personnel Selection Board shall only be submitted to the Regional Director from which he may select the employee to be promoted to the position. 
6.7 The Secretary/Director shall assess the merits of the Board s recommendation and select the employee he deems best qualified to fill the vacancy.


6.8 As soon as the promotional appointment is issued, a notice announcing the promotion shall be posted by the head of the personnel Division/Department/Office on the Bulletin Board which shall be installed in the Department/Bureau for the purpose.

The Selection Board shall maintain records of deliberations which shall be available for inspection by the Commission or its duly authorized representative.

Section 7 PROTESTS

7. 1 Who may file protest

Only a qualified next—in—rank employee who is not considered for promotion to the next higher position may file a protest with the head of the Department or Agency.

7.2 Form and content of Protest

The Protest shall be written in clear, simple and concise language, in a systematic manner, and shall have a caption as shown in the attached sample. The aggrieved party shall be called the "Protestant” and the- proposed appointee, the ”Protestee“; Provided, that where the Secretary/director, after evaluation finally decides in favor of the protestant, the protestee who decides to file his protest shall be called “Protestee-Appealant”  and the former Protestant, the “Protestant—Appelee”.

The protest shall contain the following:

7.2.1  The position contested including its item number and the salary per annum of both the protestant and the protestee;

7.2.2 The full name, office, position and salary per annum of both the protestant and the protestee;
7.2.3 The specifications of the protest;
7.2.4 - The comparative qualifications of both the protestant and protestee showing their education and training, experience, outstanding accomplishments, civil service eligibility, latest performance. rating for two rating periods, accompanied by a certified true copy of the approved organizational chart/s of the Department/Agency where either or both belong as well as the updated personal data sheets of the protestee and protestant.

7.3 When to file Protest

The protest may be filed within fifteen (15) days from notice by the protestant of the issuance of the appointment or promotion.

Failure to file a protest within the prescribed shall be deemed a-waiver of one’s right and no protest shall thereafter be entertained.


7.4 Procedure in filling protest

7.4.1 The aggrieved party shall file his protest in triplicate directly to the Secretary/Director within the prescribed period.

7.4.2 The Secretary/Director shall within three (3) days from receipt of the protest, refer the same for comment to the recommending authority, which comment shall be filed with the former within five (5) days. In case of failure on the part of the recommending authority to file his period, the case shall be basis of the records at hand.

7.4.3 The Secretary/Director shall decide a protest case within sixty (80) days from receipt of the protest.

7.4.4. Either party may, within fifteen (15) days without extension from receipt of decision, file with the Head of Department/Agency a motion for reconsideration of the decision which shall be decided upon within five (5) days from receipt thereof. Only one motion for reconsideration shall be entertained.


7.5 If the aggrieved party is not satisfied with the decision, he may elevate his protest to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), Civil Service Commission within fifteen (15) days without extension from receipt thereof.

Section 8. EFFECTIVITY

This Merit Promotion Plan and System of Ranking Positions shall take effect upon its approval thereof by the Civil Service Commission. Any subsequent changes in, or amendments to this Merit Promotion Plan and the system of Ranking Positions shall be subject to the approval of the Civil Service Commission and shall not take effect until six months from the date of the approval

All Hospitals or Agencies under or attached to the Department of Health with CSC Approved Merit Promotion Plan* may not be included within the coverage of this DOH MPP

</body>
<sign>Juan M. Flavier, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
