Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>20/12/1994</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 40,s. 1994</docnum>

<subject> SUBJECT: Operational Guidelines of the Management Committee (MANCOM) as the Decision-Making Body in the Department of Health</subject>
<body>

1. Rationale
An effective policy process is of paramount importance for the continued development of the health sector. As the most integral player in this sector, the DOH requires effective mechanisms for initiating policy actions which may eventually be promulgated as departmental, executive, and legislative policy

At the present time, the MANCOM provides a venue for reviewing and deliberating upon health policy issues requiring departmental, legislative, executive and judicial actions. This Administrative Order defines the operational guidelines to expand the role of MANCOM to become the principal decision-making body on health policy issues in the DOH.

2. Functions 

The functions of MANCOM shall specifically be as follows:
2.1 To make decisions on organizational and operational issues that cut across offices, and therefore are outside the authority of an Undersecretary or Assistant Secretary;

2.2 To make decisions on health policy actions that are within the authority of the secretary of Health.

2.3 To approve health policy issues for research and analysis and,

2.4 To make decisions on the health policy issues that require legislative, executive, and judicial actions. 

3. Composition
The composition of MANCOM shall be as follows:

3.1. The Chairperson of MANCOM shall be the Secretary of Health.

3.2 Membership at the MANCOM shall be on a permanent and temporary or at-large basis. Permanent members shall be assigned and attend MANCOM meetings on a continuous basis. Temporary members or at-large members shall be assigned on a rotating basis every six months.

3.2a. The permanent members shall be composed of the following:
A. Those appointed as Undersecretary and Assistant Secretary

B. Directors (Officers—in-Charge) of the DOH Integrated Regional
Field Offices (DIRFOs)

C. Service Directors or Program Managers from the following:

• Office of Legal Affairs
• Hospital Operations Management Service
• Internal Planning Service
• Management Advisory Service
• Department Legislative Liaison Office
• Local Government Assistance and Monitoring Service
• Bureau of Food and Drugs

D. Representative of Metro Manila hospitals
	
3.2.b. Temporary or at—large members shall be Service Directors or Program Managers from five (5) different Services/Programs that have not been included in the above list, as selected by the Secretary of Health. It shall include a representative of a Metro Manila Hospital. The rotation membership will provide an opportunity for all Directors and Program Managers to serve as MANCOM members. The Secretary of Health has the option to extend their membership upon the end of their term.

3.2.c. The Secretary of Health may invite up to five (5)- consultants to serve as MANCOM advisers on a rotating basis not to exceed six (6) months. The Secretary of Health has the option to extend the invitation at the end of the six months.

3.3 The Secretariat to the MANCOM shall be the Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS) whose functions are as follows:

3.3.a. Consolidate all health policy issues/items that have been requested by different Offices, Services or Programs for inclusion in the MANCOM meeting agenda;

3.3.b. Prepare the MANCOM agenda in consultation with the Office of the Chief of Staff,

3.3.c. Prepare the minutes of MANCOM meetings;

3.3.d. Prepare MANCOM materials in coordination-with the offices concerned that are scheduled to present; and, 

3.3.e. Set special MANCOM meetings as instructed upon by the Secretary of Health.

The head of the Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS) shall serve as the Secretary to the MANCOM.

4. Meetings 

Meetings of the MANCOM are scheduled as follows:

4.1 The new MANCOM meetings shall convene every Wednesday of the week subject to changes or postponement with prior notice to be given by the Health Policy Development Staff. 

4.2 Special meetings may be called by the Secretary or Health-through the Health Policy Development Staff as Secretariat of MANCOM as the need arises. The decisions of the MANCOM shall be made through a consensus of those who are present in the meeting, hence, the issues of quorum shall not be raised.

4.3 At least one MANCOM meeting each month shall have Special focus on issues relating to field operations. Attendance of the Regional Directors to these meetings is required. For all other meetings, the attendance of the Regional Directors is not required.

5. Inclusion in the ManCom Agenda

To get a policy issue or item on to the MANCOM agenda, the procedures shall be as

5.1 The Undersecretary or the Assistant Secretary of the office concerned shall officially endorse the policy issue or item by signing in the official Memorandum of Request For Inclusion In The MANCOM Meeting Agenda. (A copy is enclosed as Annex I to this Administrative Order.)

5.2 The official Memorandum of Request For Inclusion To The MANCOM Meeting Agenda shall be properly filled out and submitted by the Service Program Director to the Health Policy Development Staff.
5.3 The deadline for the submission of the Memorandum of Request For Inclusion In The MANCOM Meeting Agenda shall be on the Thursday prior to the MANCOM meeting.

5.4 The Health Policy Development Staff shall consolidate the list of policy issues/items that have been requested for inclusion in the MANCOM meeting agenda and present to the Office of the Chief of Staff for prioritization, clearing and final decision.

5.5 The Office, Service or Program shall be properly informed by the Health Policy Development Staff on the Friday prior to the MANCOM meeting whether or not the policy issue in the request has been included in the MANCOM meeting agenda.

5.6 The materials of the Office, Service or Program included in the MANCOM agenda shall be submitted to the Health Policy Development Staff 1n 30 copies on the Monday afternoon prior to the MANCOM meeting. These materials shall be presented as Memorandum to the MANCOM and identify the MANCOM action required. It shall provide information necessary for, decision-making. A sample Memorandum to MANCOM is shown in Annex II.

5.7 The MANCOM Agenda kit shall be distributed by the Health Policy Development Staff on the Tuesday prior to the MANCOM meeting.

5.8. The Office, Service or Program whose policy item was not included in the MANCOM agenda for the week shall automatically be considered for the agenda of subsequent MANCOM meetings at the discretion of the Office of the Chief of Staff.

6. Mancom Presentation

6.1. At the start, MANCOM presentations should clearly state the nature of MANCOM action requested, e g. For Approval, For Information, etc.

6.2 Transparencies used should be readable. Use graphics, charts or pictures whenever possible.

6.2. The entire presentation should not exceed 15 minutes.

7. Effectivity
Effectivity of this Order shall take effect on 1 January 1995.
</body>
<sign>Juan M. Flavier, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
