Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80

<date>07/12/1994</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 33-A S. 1994</docnum>

<subject>RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE LICENSURE AND REGULATION OF DIALYSIS CLINICS</subject>

<body>
Sec. 1 TITLE: These rules and regulations shall be known as the Rules and Regulations Governing the Licensure and Regulation of Dialysis Clinics.

Sec. 2 AUTHORITY: These rules and regulations are issued pursuant to Executive Order No. 5 s. 1986 and consistent with E.O. 119 which states that the Department of Health (DOH) has the power and function to:

..."regulate the operation of and issue licenses and permits to government and private hospitals, clinics and dispensaries, laboratories, blood banks, drug stores and such other establishments which by nature of their functions are required to be regulated by the ministry"...

Sec. 3 PURPOSE: These rules and regulations are promulgated to ensure the general public of quality services by the Dialysis Clinics independent of a hospital.

Sec. 4 SCOPE: This regulations shall apply to all dialysis clinics independent of a hospital.

Sec. 5 REGULATORY AUTHORITY: The Department through the Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulations shall exercise licensing and regulatory functions under these rules and regulations.

Sec. 6 DEFINITION OF TERMS: As used in these rules and regulations:

6.1 Dialysis Clinic - a medical clinic independent of a hospital performing dialysis to patients with kidney failure on an out-patient basis and duly licensed by the Department of Health. It shall be referred to in these rules as the "clinic".

6.2 Diplomate of Philippine Society of Nephrology - a Doctor of Medicine who had completed specialty training in nephrology from a hospital accredited by the Philippines Society for Nephrology and duly certified by its Board.

6.3 Tertiary Hospital - a fully departmentalized hospital equipped with the service needed to support certified medical specialists and other licensed physicians rendering services in the field of medicine, pediatrics, OB-Gyne, Surgery their sub-specialties and ancillary services.

6.4 Department - shall mean the Department of Health.

6.5 Bureau - shall refer to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation.

Sec. 7 LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS (Technical Standards) - The following requirements shall be compiled with the Dialysis Clinic applying for its license to operate.

7.1 PERSONNEL

7.1.1. The physician-in-charge of the unit shall be a trained nephrologist, and a diplomate of the Philippine Society of Nephrology.

7.1.1.1 At least one of the medical staff of the clinic shall be a member of the medical staff of a tertiary hospital in the locality to facilitate referral of complications that may arise from the dialysis procedure.

7.1.1.2 If the above is not possible the clinic shall have a memorandum of agreement with a tertiary hospital for complications that may arise from the dialysis procedure. Ambulance service shall be readily available for the transport of the patients.

7.1.2 Registered Nurse shall have certificate on a Special Training in dialysis for not less than 25 days.

Experience in hospital/clinical work for 1 year.

7.1.3 Medical Technicians shall have certificate of dialysis training and at least 1 year experience in the same field.

7.1.4 Midwives or Nursing Attendants who finished a one year course in nursing aide or attendant with 2 years college studies.

7.1.5 Administrative personnel

7.1.6 Utility Man

7.2 EQUIPMENT/INSTRUMENTS

7.2.1 Stethoscope

7.2.2 Sphygmomanometer with stand

7.1.3 Examining light

7.1.4 Oxygen unit with gauge

7.1.5 Minor surgical instrument set

7.1.6 Instrument table

7.1.7 Treatment table

7.1.8 Dialysis Machine

7.1.9 Patient bed(s) with guard rails

- 90 cm. width
- 70 cm. length
7.1.10 E Cart with emergency medicines

7.1.11 Goose neck lamp

7.1.12 Stand-by rechargeable light

7.1.13 Ambu bag

7.1.14 Sterilizer

7.1.15 ECG Machine

7.1.16 Cardiac Monitor

7.1.17 Defibrillator

7.1.18 Stretcher

7.1.19 Wheelchair

7.1.20 Other requirements

7.1.20.1 Standby generator

7.1.20.2 Fire extinguisher

7.1.20.3 Transport vehicle for patient's use (ambulance) or a contract with providers of such ambulance services.

7.3 PHYSICAL PLANT

7.3.1 Administrative Service

7.3.1.1 Lobby

- information counter/admitting area
- communication area
- waiting area
- toilet facilities

7.3.1.2 Business Office

- cashier/billing
- finance/budget auditor
- toilet facilities

7.3.2 Dialysis Service Complex

7.3.2.1 Dialysis room with air conditioning unit

7.3.2.2 Nursing area

7.3.2.3 Lavatory

7.3.2.4 Sterile instrument supply and storage area

7.3.2.5 Sub sterilizing room

7.3.2.6 Toilet facility

7.3.2.7 Receiving and releasing area

7.3.2.8 Central Sterilization and Supply room

7.3.2.9 Sterilizing and work area

7.3.2.10 Sterile Supply Storage area

Sec. 8 Basic Licensing Requirements: Any person, firm, corporation, desiring to establish or operate and maintain a dialysis clinic shall submit to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation the following requirements:

8.1 Letter of application on the prescribed form of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation.

8.2 Certificate of Registration from the Bureau of Domestic Trade for single proprietorship of from Securities and Exchange Commission for partnership or corporation.

8.3 Tax Identification Number (TIN) of the proprietor for single proprietorship or that of the managing partner or the corporation as the case maybe.

8.4 List of Technical Equipment and Instruments.

8.5 List of Personnel with valid Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) Identification card of the medical and paramedical staff together with their certificates of dialysis training/experience.

8.6 Professional Tax Receipts (PTR) of practitioner staff of the clinic.

Sec. 9 Application for Licensure: Application for license to operate and maintain a dialysis clinic shall be filed at the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation in the form prescribed by the Bureau.

9.1 Each application shall be signed by the applicant or the person duly authorized to act for in his behalf.

9.2 Any material false statement in their application or failure to comply with the requirements may serve as basis for denial of the license to operate.

9.3 An application fee of ₱500.00 shall accompany the application.

Sec. 10 License Fee

10.1 A non-refundable fee of One thousand pesos (₱1,000.00) shall be paid upon approval of license to operate.

10.2 All fees shall be payable to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation to be paid to the cashier of the Department of Health.

10.3 A penalty of ₱300.00 for late renewal shall be charged in addition to the renewal fee if the application is filed after the expiry date of license to operate.

10.4 The license to operate shall be considered lapsed if not renewed within thirty (30) days after its expiration. Subsequent renewal of license shall be applied for which shall be subject to an application fee.

Sec. 11 Separate License: Separate license to operate shall be required for clinics or branches thereof maintained in separate premises even though they are operated under the same management.

Sec. 12 Inspection: Licensed clinics shall be inspected regularly and records shall be made available to determine compliance with the rules and regulations.

12.1 Each licensed clinic shall give the Director of the Bureau or his authorized representative(s) at any reasonable time the opportunity to inspect the clinic.

12.2 Each licensed clinic shall make available to the Director of the Bureau or his authorized representative(s) their records pursuant to these regulation.

12.3 The Director of the Bureau or his representative(s) may be assisted by duly designated experts from professional associates in such inspections.

12.4 Directors of Regional Field Offices in coordination with the Local Government are hereby empowered to report to the Bureau the existence of Dialysis clinics without licenses to operate and for any violation of these rules and regulations.

Sec. 13 Issuance of License to Operate

13.1 After the clinic is found to have met all the requirements, including ocular inspection, the application shall be approved by the Undersecretary of Health, Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation (OHFSR) upon recommendation of the Director of the Bureau.

13.2 The license to operate shall have a one year period of validity from the date of issuance.

Sec. 14 Terms and Conditions of the License to Operate a Clinic:

14.1 The license to operate and any right granted under said license shall not be assigned or transferred.

14.2 The license to operate shall be terminated upon change of ownership or management or change in location, therefore renewal of the license has to be applied for and approved by the Undersecretary of Health, Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation (OHFSR) upon recommendation of the Director of the Bureau.

14.3 Change of ownership in management or location shall be reported in writing to and acknowledged by the Bureau fifteen (15) days from the effectivity of such change.

Sec. 15 Exhibition of the License. The license to operate of the clinic shall be posted in a conspicuous area readily seen by the public. A copy of these rules and regulation shall be readily available for reference and guidance of the clinic staff and personnel.

Sec. 16 Renewal

16.1 Application for renewal of the license to operate shall be filed within sixty (60) days prior to the date of expiration. A penalty shall be charged if the application is filed after the expiry date in accordance with Section 10 of these rules.

16.2 License not renewed thirty (30) days from expiration shall be considered lapsed and no longer effective. The dialysis clinic shall then be required to apply for a new license.

16.3 The Bureau shall process the application for renewal immediately upon receipt thereof and after an ocular inspection of the facilities has been conducted by the inspection team. The licensed clinic shall continue its operation while waiting for the final action of its application unless otherwise ordered by the Director of the Bureau.

Sec. 17 Publication of List of Licensed Dialysis clinics. A list of licensed clinics shall be published periodically, and shall be made available to any person, agency or company for legitimate purpose.

Sec. 18 Sanction: The Department may suspend or revoke the license to operate a Dialysis clinic if upon investigation it shall be found guilty of violation of the provisions under these rules or any law or rule related to operation of such clinics in the Philippines.

Any dialysis clinic operating without a license from the Department of Health shall be guilty of misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than One Thousand (₱1,000.00) Pesos but not more than Five Thousand (₱5,000.00) Pesos. It shall be barred from participating in any health program requiring a license from the DOH.

Sec. 19 Effectivity: These rules and regulations shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in the official gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
</body>

<sign>JUAN M. FLAVIER, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>