Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

 

<date>15/2/1994</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 24,s. 1994</docnum>

<subject> RULES AND EEGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ACCREDITATION OF AMBULATORY SURGICAL CLINICS</subject>

<body>Sec. 1 TITLE: These rules and regulations shall be known as The "Rules and Regulations Governing the Accreditation of Ambulatory Surgical Clinics”

Sec. 2  AUTHORITY: These rules and regulations are issued pursuant 'to Section 4 paragraph H of Executive Order 119, which states that the Department of Health (DOH) has the power and function to:


	…”regulate the operation of and issue licenses and permits to government and private hospitals, clinics and dispensaries, laboratories, blood banks, drug stores, and such other establishments which by the nature of their functions are required to be regulated by the ministry..." 

Sec. 3 PURPOSE: These rules and regulations are promulgated to insure the general public of quality services by the Ambulatory
Surgical Clinics

Sec. 4 SCOPE: These regulations shall apply to all ambulatory surgical clinics independent of a hospital.

Sec. 5 REGULATORY AUTHORITY The Department through Office for
Health Facilities, Standards and Regulations shall exercise regulatory functions under these rules and regulations. 

Sec. 6 DEFINITION OF TERMS: As used in these rules and regulations:

	6.1) Ambulatory Surgical Clinic — A medical Clinic independent of a hospital performing surgical operations on an outpatient basis and duly accredited by the Department of Health. It shall be referred to in these rules as the "clinic”

 

 

 

6.2) Diplomat of specialty society – A doctor of medicine who had completed specialty training in a hospital accredited by the spec1alty society concerned and duly certified by its Board.

6.3) Tertiary Hospital - is fully departmentalized and equipped with the service capabilities needed to support certified medical specialists and other licensed physicians rendering services in the field of medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, surgery, their subspecialties - and ancillary services

6.4)I Department - shall mean the Department of Health

6.5) Bureau - Shall refer to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation

Sec. 7 ACCREDITATION REQUIREMENTS (TECHNICAL STANDARDS) - The following requirements shall be complied with by an ambulatory surgical clinic applying for accreditation

	7.l Personnel

		7.1.1. Physician surgeon who is a diplomats in his chosen field of specialty:

			7.1.l.l At least one of the medical staff of the clinic shall be a member of the medical staff of a tertiary hospital located within reasonable distance from the clinic for ease in admitting emergency cases that may arise from the procedures.

			7.1.1.2 If the above is not possible the clinic shall have a Memorandum of Agreement with a tertiary hospital within a reasonable distance from the former regarding acceptance of emergency cases that may arise from the procedures. This shall include provision of ambulance services
		7.1.2 Certified Anesthesiologist
		7.1.3 Registered Nurse
		7.1.4 Nursing Aide.
		7.1.5 Administrative Personnel
		7.1.6 Utility Aide
	
	7.2 Equipment/Instruments
		7.2.1	Stethoscope
		7.2.2 Sphygmomanometer with Stand
		7.2.3 Examining Light
		7.2.4 Oxygen unit with Gauge
		7.2.5 Surgical Instrument Set
		7.2.6 Instrument table
		7.2.7 Treatment table
       	7.2.8 Tracheostomy Set
       	7.2.9 Thoracostomy Set
		7.2.10 Paracentesis Set
		7.2.11 Patient’s Bed(s) with Guard Rails
			-90 cm Width
			-70 cm length
       	7.2.12 Operating Table
       	7.2.13 Suction Apparatus
       	7.2.14 Operat1ng Room Light
	7.2.15 Stand—by Operating Room Light
	7.2.16 Anesthesia machine for the Operat1ng Room
	7.2.17 Anesthesia Table
	7.2.18 Laryngoscope w/ different sizes of blades
       	7.2.19 Endotracheal tube with different sizes
       	7.2.20 Ambu Bag
       	7.2.21Sterilizer
		7.2.22 ECG Machine
       	7.2.23 Defibrillator
		7.2.24 Lumbar Set
       	7.2.25 Stretcher
       	7.2.26 Wheelchair
       	7.2.27 Other Requirements:

       7.2.27.1 Stand—by Generator
       7.2.27.2 Fire Extinguisher
       7.2.27.3 Transport Vehicle for Patient's use (Ambulance) or a contract with providers of such ambulance services.
              7.3 Physical Patient
       	7.3.1 Administrative Services:
			7.3.1.1 Lobby
       -Information counter/admitting area
       - Communication Area
       -Waiting Area
       -Toilet Facilities
       7.3.IT2 Business Office
       	-Cashier/Billing
       	-Finance/budget/auditor
       	-Toilet facilities

       7.3.2 Recovery Room with Toilet Facilities
       7.3.3 Surgical Service Complex

       7.3.3.1 Major operating room with air-conditioning unit

7.3.3.2 Minor Operating room with air-conditioning unit. 7.3.3.3 Scrub-up area
       7.3.3.4 Sterile Instrument, supply and anesthesia storage area 
       7.3.3.5 Sub-sterilization room
       7.3.3.6 Clean-up area
       7.3.8.7 Doctor’s locker room and lounge with toilet
       7.3.3.8 Nurse locker room and 1ounge with toilet
       7.3.3.9 Janitor’s closet
		7.3.3.10 Central sterilization and supply service
		7.3.3.1l Receiving and releasing area
		7.3.3.12 Sterilizing and work area
		7.3.3.13 Sterile supply storage area

Sec. 8 BASIC ACCREDITATION REQUIREMENTS: Any person, firm or corporation desiring to establish or operate and maintain an ambulatory, surgical c1inic shall submit to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation the following requirements:

	8.1 Letter of application on the prescribed form of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation.

	8.2 If Certificate of Registration from the Bureau of Domestic Trade for single proprietorship or from the Securities and Exchange Commission for partnership or corporation.
	8.3 Mayor’s Permit to operate a clinic

	8.4. Tax Identification Number (TIN) of the proprietor for single proprietorship or that of the managing partner or the corporation as the case may be.

	8.5 Valid Professional Regulation Commission (PRC) Identification Card of the Medical and Paramedical Staff.

	8.6 Professional Tax Receipts (PTR) of practitioner staff of the clinic
	8.7 License to operate and maintain a laboratory from the Bureau of Research and Laboratories for clinics that have their own laboratory

	8.8 License to operate an x-ray facility from the Bureau of Licensing and Regulations for clinics that have their own x— ray fac1lity.

Sec. 9 APPLICATION FOR ACCREDITATION: Application for accreditation shall be filed at the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation in the form prescribed by the Bureau.
       9.1 Each application shall be signed under oath or affirmation by the applicant or the person duly authorized to act for and in his behalf

       9.2 Any material false statement in this application or failure to comply with the requirements may serve as basis for denial of accreditation

       9.3 An application fee P800 00 shall accompany the application

Sec. 10 ACCREDITATION FEE:

       10.1 A non—refundable fee of six hundred (P600. 00) shall be paid upon approval of accreditation.

       10.2 All fees shall be payable to the Bureau of Licensing and Regulation to be paid to the Cashier of the Department of Health

       10.3. A penalty of P3O0.00 for late renewal shall be charged in addition to the renewal fee if the application is filed during the next thirty (30) days after the anniversary date of accreditation

       10.4 The accreditation shall be considered lapsed if not renewed within thirty (30) days after expiration. Subsequent re-accreditation shall be applied for which shall be subject to an application fee


SEC. 11 SEPARATE ACCREDITATION: Separate accreditation shall be required for clinics or branches thereof, maintained in separate premises even though they are operated under the same management

SEC. 12 INSPECTION: Accredited c1inics shal1 be inspected regularly and records shall be made available to determine compliance with the rules and regulations.
	12.1 Each accredited clinic shall give the Director of the Bureau or his authorized representative(s) at any reasonable time the opportunity to inspect the clinic
	12.2 Each accredited clinic shall make available to the Director of the Bureau or his authorized representative(s) their records pursuant to this regulation

       12.3 The Director of the Bureau or his representative(s) may be assisted by duly designated experts from professional associations in such inspections.

       12.4 Directors of Regional Field Offices in coordination with the Local Government Units are hereby empowered to report to the Bureau the existence of ambulatory surgical clinics without proper accreditation and for any violation of these rules and regulations

Sec. 13 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ACCREDITATION:

       13.1 After the clinic is found to have met all the requirements including payment of accreditation fees and after ocular inspection, the application shall be approved by the Undersecretary of Health for
Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation (OHFSR), upon recommendation by the Director of the Bureau

       13.2 The Certificate of Accreditation shall have a one year period of valid1ty from the date of issuance.

Sec. l4 TERMS AND CONDITIONS CF THE ACCREDITATION CERTIFICATE:

       14.1 The certificate of accreditation and any right granted under the accreditation shall not be assigned or transferred.

       14.2 Accreditation shall be automatically terminated upon change of ownership or management or change in location, therefore, a re-accreditation has to be applied for and approved by the Undersecretary of
Health for Standards and Regulation (OHFSR), upon recommendation of the Director of the Bureau.

       14.3 Change of ownership in management or location shall be reported in writing to, and acknowledged by the Bureau fifteen (15) days from the effectivity of such change

Sec. 15 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE: The certificate of accreditation of the clinic shall: be posted in a conspicuous area readily seen by the Public. A copy of these rules and regulation shall be filed within sixty (60) days prior to the date of expiration. A penalty shall be paid if the
Application is filed after the anniversary date in accordance with Section 10 of these rules.

       16.2 The Bureau shall process the application for renewal immediately upon receipt thereof and after an ocular inspection of the facilities has been conducted by the inspection team. The accredited clinic shall continue its operation while waiting for the final action; on its application unless otherwise ordered by the Director of the Bureau.

       16.3 An accreditation that has not been renewed thirty (30) days from expiration shall be considered lapsed, therefore re-accreditation shall be applied for and approved by the Undersecretary of Health,
OHFSR.

Sec. 17 PUBLICATION OF LIST OF ACCREDITED AMBULATORY SURGICAL
CLINICS:	A list of accredited clinics shall be published periodically and shall be made available to any person, agency, company for legitimate purpose.

Sec. 18 SANCTION: The Department may suspend or revoke the certificate of accreditation of an ambulatory surgical clinic if upon investigation it shall be found guilty of violation of the provisions under these rules or any law or rule related to operation of such clinics in the Philippines.

 	Any ambulatory surgical clinic operating without proper accreditation from the Department of Health shall be guilty of misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than one thousand (Pl,000.00) pesos but not more than five thousand (P5,000.00) pesos. It shall be barred from participating in any health program requiring accreditation from the DOH.

Sec. 19 EFFECTIVITY: These rules and regulations shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in the official gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.

 
 
</body>
<sign>Juan M. Flavier, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
