
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>6/7/1994</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 32C,s. 1994</docnum>

<subject>
SUBJECT: PRESCRIBING GUIDELINES FOR PAYMENT OF HAZARD ALLOWANCE TO PUBLIC HEALTH WORKERS UNDER R.A. 7305</subject>

<body>
1.0 RATIONALE
	In order to provide policy which shall serve as basis  in claiming for hazard allowance of public health workers exposed to risk through the nature of their respective duties, workplace and clientele, the following guidelines shall be prescribed.


2.0 DEFINITION:

2.1 Hazard - - - - refers to the risks in work areas, units and stations to which public health workers are assigned. Such workers, units and stations offer risks to the health and safety of public health workers due to their exposure to contagious and communicable diseases, toxic gases, chemicals, radiation-emitting and other hazardous substances, their direct handling of hazardous equipment, substances , their direct handling of hazardous equipment. It also includes specific geographical places where such work areas and units, are strife torn/embattled and declared as under state of calamity or emergency, and condition that will endanger their well-being as posed by its clientele such as prisoners, drug addicts and those suffering from mental disorder

2.2 Remote/hard to reach/isolated - a location where any or all of the following conditions exist:

(a) No roads or trails
(b) No roads but trails only

(c) Squatter’s areas, slums, dumpsites
(d) None or lack of Social amenities e.g. schools, churches, etc.


3.0 COVERAGE
	Only Public Health Workers with plantilla appointment in the health agency of the government shall be considered in the coverage of hazard allowance.

	The following Health Workers are exposed to hazards at the workplace:

3.1 Public Health workers in hospitals such as but not limited to Medical and Paramedical personnel directly involved in the delivery of services to highly contagious or communicable diseases.

3.2 Public health workers assigned in hospitals, sanitaria, rural health units, health centers, health infirmaries, barangay health stations, clinics and other health establishments located in:

	3.2.1 Remote/depressed/difficult areas
	3.2.2 Distressed or isolated stations
	3.2.3 Strife-torn/embattled areas
	3.2.4 Prison Camps
	3.2.5 Areas declared under the state of calamity or emergency for the duration thereof which expose health workers to great danger, contagion, radiation, volcanic activity/eruption, occupational risks or perils to life

3.3 Public Health Workers assigned in:

	3.3.1 Mental hospitals/wards
	3.3.2 Drug abuse drop in centers
	3.3 Drug abuse rehabilitation centers

3.4 Public Health Workers assigned in radiation exposed areas/clinics, laboratories and service workshops.

3.5 Public Health Workers assigned in laboratories and disease-infested areas.

3.6 Public Health Workers in any health facility/area that maybe declared as hazardous workplace by the Secretary of Health as recommended by the Management—Health Worker Consultative Council.

3.7 Public Health Workers who from time to time are assigned to areas under 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5

Public health workers not falling in any of the above-mentioned categories shall be excluded from receiving the benefit herein authorized.
 
4.0 SPECIFIC NATURE Of WORKPLACE AND FUNCTIONS OF HEALTH WORKERS ENTITLED TO HAZARD PAY:

4. 1 Operating radiation-emitting equipment and handling radioactive and toxic substances including but not limited to services rendered by Radiologists, X-ray Technicians, Physiotherapist;
   
4.2 Receiving and handling of infectious specimens or materials including but not limited to services rendered by Pathologists, Laboratory Technicians, Medical Technicians

4.3 Handling of and spraying insecticides, molluscides and hazardous chemicals, flammable, noxious and explosive substances including, but not limited to services rendered by Malaria Sprayman, Schistosomiasis, Sprayman, Sanitary Inspector, Chemist

4.4 Direct Handling of biologic agents such as bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoans, nematodes and other parasites
  
4.5 Assignment in disease-infected and vector—infested areas including, but not limited to services rendered by Program Coordinator,  Malariologist, Entomologist, Malaco1ogist, Zoologists,

4.6 Direct handling of patients/persons suffering from infectious and contagious diseases and mental disorders; 

4.7 Direct handling of clientele such as prisoners, drug addicts, and those suffering from mental disorders,

4.8 Direct handling of laboratory animals for purposes of experimentation, research, observation and the like.

4.9 Occasional assignment of public health workers to the areas specified under 3.l and 3.2.

L 4.10 Assignment in areas declared by the Secretary of Health as recommended by the Management Health Workers Consultative Council as remote/depressed/difficult areas, distressed or isolated stations, and embattled/strife-torn area

4.11 Assignment in areas declared by the President of the Republic of the Philippines as in the state of calamity or emergency within a specific duration as determined by the Secretary of Health.

5.0 PROCEDURE

	The heads of office/institutions/agencies concerned shall:

5.1 Determine the degree of exposure to hazards in workplace based on the functions of the health worker.
 
5.2 Determine who are exposed to the hazard
5.3 Submit recommendations and list of personnel who are entitled to the hazards pay to the Secretary of Health for approval.


6. 0 PAYMENT OF HAZARD ALLOWANCE

	Pursuant to the provision of R. A. 7305 and consistent with the principles of equity, justice and fairness, a supplemental guideline for the payment of hazard allowance is hereby prescribed.

 

6.1 Public Health workers of SG-19 and below shall be compensated equal amount of hazard allowance, authorizing herein the monthly basic salary of SG-19 as basis for computation fixed at thirty percent (30%) of which fifty percent (50%) will be implemented beginning January 1995. Full implementation will be completed by end of 1995.


6.2 Public Health workers of SG-20 and above shall be compensated equal amount of hazard allowance authorizing herein the monthly basic salary of SG-30 as basis for computation fixed at nine-point-eighty percent (9.80%) of which fifty percent (50%) will be implemented beginning January 1995. Full implementation will be completed by end of 1996.

6.3 Public health workers already receiving hazard allowance e.g. X-ray Technician, radiation maintenance personnel, etc. shall be given the option to choose whichever allowance is higher.

6.4 Public Health Workers who are assigned from time to time to areas specified under 3.1 and 3. 2 shall receive hazard allowance based on the number of days of their assignment in said areas.

 
7.0 FUNDING SGUIRGE

       The funding source for the payment of hazard allowance shall be incorporated in the regular budget of the agency concerned starting 1995.

8.0 EFFECTIVITY 
This Order shall take effect upon approval of the Secretary of Health.

</body>
<sign>Juan M. Flavier, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
