 Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>02/28/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 6-A s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing guidelines for cash incentives to negative, able-bodied Leprosy patients in sanitaria</subject>


<body>


1. DEFINITION OF TERMS: 

1.1. A leprosy case is one who is in need of treatment or is under anti-leprosy treatment

1.2 A negative case of leprosy is one who had received and completed treatment with Multi-Drug Therapy (MDT) and is found negative through skin smears examination.

1.3 Release from Treatment (RFT) is a case who has completed the prescribed Multi—Drug Therapy regimen.

1.4 Release from Control (RFC) is a case who has completed the prescribed surveillance period after completing MDT.

1.5 Multi-Drug Therapy (MDT) refers to the standard drugs prescribed by the World Health Organization and adopted by the Department of Health for the treatment of leprosy. 

1.6 Able-bodied refers to one who has no visible physical deformity and disability.


2. RATIONALE

2.1 The cure rate of leprosy with the use of MDT approximates 100% in controlled conditions such as existing in the sanitarium.

2.2 Treatment with MDT in a sanitarium reguires at least a confinement period of 3 years. The prolonged period disrupts unnecessarily the social and economic life of the patient.

2.3 The grant of cash incentives to those leprosy cases who were released from treatment and released from control would alleviate partially the economic difficulties encountered by the cured clients in their transition to normal community life. 

2.4 Providing cash incentives to discharged negatives, RFT, or RFC cases will be far more economical to the hospital as the cost of a year's stay in the sanitarium is P 41,000.00 per case.


3. OBJECTIVE:

This guideline is issued to:

3.1 Define the coverage and criteria for eligibility of the cash incentives.

3.2 Implement the grant of cash incentives to negatives and able—bodied former leprosy patients upon discharged from any of the 8 sanitaria of the Department of Health.

3.3 Standardize the cash incentives to be provided/subsidized by the Sanitaria.


4. COVERAGE AND FUNDING SOURCE:

The grant of cash incentives shall be implemented initially by the sanitaria which can set aside quarterly savings from MOOE to cover the cash incentives for eligible clients before the end of 1995. Beginning 1996, and annually thereafter, all sanitaria shall set aside from MOOE the amount necessary to cover the cash incentives for 20% of their eligible clients This ceiling, however does not preclude a sanitarium from disbursing funds to cover the cash incentives of all eligible clients in a single year.
 

5. AMOUNT OF CASH INCENTIVE

Each eligible client shall receive only once, the amount of TEN THOUSAND PESOS (P 10,000.00), upon discharge from the sanitarium 


6. ELIGIBILITY

Client eligibility, as laid down by the Secretary of Health, shall be followed.


7. RESPONSIBILITY FOR ASSESSMENT OF ELIGIBILITY:

Each sanitarium is mandated to create a Local Review Board in order to determine those who are eligible for the cash incentives.


8. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: 

8.1 All dischargeable patients who have no visible means of support, who are between 15 to 65 years of age, able—bodied, and who have completed the standard regimen of Multi—Drug Therapy (MDT) shall be eligible for the grant of cash incentives upon discharge.

8.2 The Board shall follow the priorities established for discharge purposes by this office (as per Department Circular No. 35, s. 1994 - Guidelines on the Review for Discharge of Leprosy Patients in the Sanitarium). Those who have stayed longest in the institution shall be the first ones to be recommended for discharge. 

8.3 Strict documentation of proceedings of the Board, including stringent record-keeping and storage shall be practiced at all times. A picture of the patient indicating condition of hands and feet upon discharge is necessary. The possibility that one particular client may hop and shop from every sanitarium should be avoided through strict records intake, clinical examination, and adherence to admission criteria.

8.4 If, for one reason or another, a discharged patient who had received a cash incentive earlier is re-admitted for treatment purposes (leprosy), he shall go through the standard treatment and be discharged without cash incentive upon satisfaction of treatment criteria.

8.6 Cases who are under 15 years of age shall receive the cash incentives through their parents/guardians.


9. RESPONSIBILITY OF HEAD OF AGENCY:

The Chief of the Sanitarium shall be responsible and personally liable for disbursements of cash incentives to non—eligibles as well as to others not covered by the guidelines on eligibility. 


10. RECORDING AND REPORTING: 

10.1 It is the responsibility of the chairman of the Local Review Board to keep track of those clients who have availed of the cash incentives. A master registry for this purpose shall be maintained by the sanitarium. 

10.2 A quarterly report of clients given cash incentives, indicating name, age, sex, forwarding address, length of stay in the sanitarium, type of leprosy on discharged, disability rating, and including a 2" x 2” colored picture of the patient, shall be submitted to the Director of the Communicable Disease Control Service (CDGS) by the Chief of the Sanitarium.


11. IMPLEMENTATION PERIOD:

The implementation of the foregoing guidelines shall be for a period of 3 years, from 30 March 1995 to 30 March 1998.


i2. EFFECTIVITY:

These guidelines shall take effect upon approval by the Secretary of Health.


 
</body> 
<sign>JAIME GALVEZ-TAN, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 

