<date>03/01/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 5 s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Security measures to be adapted in the compound and in each building/office in the Central Office, Department of Health</subject>


<body>

In view of of the reported cases of property losses and pilferages and the presence of suspicious looking characters in the Central Office compound, employees and visitors are enjoined to observe and comply with the security measures being adapted to ensure protection of properties and safety of employees.
 

A. BUILDING AND OFFICES

The duly designated Building Administrator in coordination with the Security Section (both White and Blue Guards} shall formulate the security plan suited to the peculiarities (physical lay-out, functions, operational policies) of their respective buildings, provided that the individual building security policy measures shall uni supra follow the pattern set herein. The approved policy guidelines must be posted at the entrance of the respective building for compliance of employees end clients. These guidelines must however be periodically reviewed and updated.

1. There should only be one point of entry in every building/office, provided that the back doors, passages and other outlets can be opened immediately in case of emergency.

2. The Security Guard on duty is authorized to inspect bags/packages and search an individual whenever he/she deems it necessary.

3. Fire arms and other deadly weapons should be deposited with and duly receipted by the Security Guard on duty. It should he returned upon presentation of the receipt prior to the departure of the visitor.

4. Visitors shall register in the "VISITOR’S LOG BOOK” provided at each entry point of a building/office. They shall surrender their individual ID and secure their VISITOR’S PASS (as per attached sample).

5. The VISITOR’S LOG BOOK would provide the following information: 

5.1 Date
5.2 Time of entry 
5.3 Printed Name and signature of the visitor
5.4 Office Address
5.5 Purpose or the visit
5.6 Person or Office to be visited
5.7 Time of exit
5.8 Remarks

6. Before leaving the building/premises, the visitor shall log-out, surrender the VISITOR'S PASS to get his/her ID.

7. Each building shall have its own VISITOR’S PASS which could be distinguished from each other, through a thick—outline number of the building.

8. In case a visitor did not pas his/her entry point in leaving the building he/she originally visited and proceeded to another building, the visitor shall follow the entry procedure and present the VISITOR’S PASS of the first building visited instead of his/her own ID. The visitor’s ID shall be taken from his original point of entry after the surrender of the building’s VISITOR’S PASS.

9. No ID shall be returned unless the VISITOR’S PASS had been surrendered. In case the visitor lost his VISITOR’S ID; he/she maybe allowed to get out of the building upon submission of a Sworn Statement that the VISITOR’S PASS was accidentally lost and it was never been passed on to someone else for any obvious reason.

10. For the protection of ID holders, DOH may not return an ID left in our custody to person other than the rightful owner except when there is a written authority and the designate is properly identified. DOH shall not be held responsible if an ID left within its premises landed in the hands of people of malintentions.

11. The duly designated Building Administrator shall be responsible for the proper implementation of this Department Order in his/her building including the installation of the security system.


B. GATES AND GROUND

All vehicles entering and leaving the compound shall be subjected to inspection. Each GATE shall issue a color coded GATE PASS (as per attached sample): RED for Gate 1; BLUE for Gate 2; and GREEN for Gate 3. Vehicles leaving the compound should use the same gate where it entered, however, if the gate referred to had been closed in accordance with the schedule per Department Circular No. 164 A, s, 1994 said outgoing vehicle should use gate 1 to surrender the corresponding GATE PASS before leaving the compound. 

Gates shall he provided with LOG BOOK to record the flow of traffic. The herein GUIDELINES must be followed:

1. Record in the LOG BOOK the date, time, plate number of the vehicle and the corresponding number of the GATE PASS.

2. Incoming official vehicles of DOH with STICKER (as per attached sample} need not be issued a GATE PASS but its coming in and going out shall he recorded in the LOG BOOK with the sticker number or name of driver entered in the column “GATE PASS NUMBER”.

3. DOH vehicles leaving the compound shall submit a copy of the trip ticket issued for the particular travel. Exempted from this rule are vehicles officially assigned to the Secretary of Health down to the position of Director.

4. Vehicles of members of diplomatic Corps, members of both Houses of Congress and Cabinet Members when properly identified may be exempted from the ruling on GATE PASS on condition that, the official himself (Diplomat, Senator, Congressman, and Secretary) is on board the vehicle when coming in and going out of the compound. The entrance and going out of the vehicle shall however be entered in the LOG BOOK. 

5. Incoming vehicle with load inside their baggage compartment shall inform the Security Guard on duty at the gate. The Security Guard on duty shall mark with color the commodity. Deformed or disarranged coded color shall be sufficient reason not to allow the vehicle to leave the compound without first proving thru proper document that the load properly and legitimately belong to the owner of the vehicle. Vehicles falling under the category of item 4 above are exempted. 


C. GENERAL PROVISIONS

1. Regular employees desiring to enter a building may as exempt from registering in the VISITORS' LOG BOOK if he/she is in proper uniform and wearing the DOH ID.

2. During wash days, wearing of the DOH ID is sufficient to exempt the employees from registering in the Visitors’ Log Book. 

3. Employees exempt from wearing uniform for being pregnant, etc need only to wear the ID. 

4. Personnel are discouraged to stay in the office beyond office hours and to come to office during Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, except in cases when they are authorized/required to render overtime services.

5. The guArd on duty shall he responsible for monitoring and recording the movement of all materials, office supplies/office equipment within the building. A written permit or Memorandum Receipt shall be surrendered to the Security Guard assigned to the building whenever equipment and materials shall he brought out of the building. The Security Guard shall be furnished with copy of the Memo Receipt and other documents of in—coming and out-going equipment or apparatus.
 
6. Employees who would stay over night in their office due to very early travel schedule or other important matters may be allowed to stay in their respective offices provided that there is an advance notice to the Security Section, General Service Division, Administrative Service.

7. The guard on duty must screen in a very courteous and polite manner all incoming guest or visitors and require them to register in the VISITOR’S LOG BOOK.

8. The guard on duty shall issue a VISITOR’S PASS to the incoming visitor in lieu of their lD's or any identification material.

9. The guard on duty should check visitors for firearms or any deadly weapon. These should be deposited with the guard on duty and in turn would be issued proper acknowledgement receipt.

10. All vendors are strictly prohibited inside any office/building. 

11. Visitors are not allowed access to any comfort rooms inside any office or building after office hours and during non-working days.

12. Security Guards assigned to man building entrance and gate shall he in proper uniform.


This order takes effect immediately.

 
 

</body> 
<sign>JAIME Z. GALVEZ TAN M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 
f/n:security
gsdv/ane
