Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>09/15/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 16-A s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: The Diabetes Mellitus Prevention and Control Program in the Philippines</subject>


<body>

1. Background

The first national diabetes prevalence survey conducted by the Department of Health was done in 1982. The result showed a prevalence rate of 4.1% in a randomly selected population of 12,297, ages ranging from 20-65 years old. For a developing country, this figure is a notable public health problem. According to WHO, the prevalence rate of diabetes is expected to double every ten(10) years. With the present population of 65 million, the problem posed by diabetes as a disease can be tremendous. It is now estimated to affect at least 3 million Filipinos.

Currently, there is no existing national program addressing this chronic disabling disorder except for the present clientele being served at private clinics and hospital centers. Many do not have access to health services and some can avail only of inadequate health services.

In recognition of the current and emerging importance of diabetes, a concerted effort has been organized to commonly address the diverse problems of the disease. In the National Conference for the Hospitals as Centers of Wellness Program, the action plan of the Diabetes Consortium was cited for implementation. It called for active support and participation from all sectors concerned. Integration of public health and clinical components must be emphasized utilizing and encompassing ail aspects of preventive strategies. The Non-Communicable Disease-Control Service (NCDCS), Office for Public Health Services, is mandated and tasked, through Executive Order No. 119 s. of 1987, to anchor the Diabetes Mellitus Prevention and Control Program (DMPCP}. 



2. Policy
It is the policy and responsibility of the Department of Health, in support to the 42nd World Health Assembly Resolution on Diabetes Mellitus as a major public health problem, to plan, organize and implement a nationwide Diabetes Prevention and Control Program. The program shall aim to reduce morbidity and mortality from diabetes including its complications and thus, improving the quality of life of the diabetics in the country. The Non—Communicable Disease Control Service shall be the lead agency responsible for the over-all management and implementation of the Diabetes Prevention and Control Program. All DOH agencies concerned as well as cooperating government and non—government institutions/organizations shall be tapped in the implementation of program activities identified.

 

3. The Program
The Diabetes Mellitus Prevention and Control Program is a comprehensive, integrated approach aimed at curbing the alarming morbidity and mortality from diabetes and its complications and the improvement of the quality of life of the diabetics. It utilizes all levels of preventive care in the community and hospital settings with the appropriate medical/therapeutic support.



4. Components of the Program

4.1 Health promotion and education

This includes patient information and education; public information and education and; intersectoral collaboration on the nature and extent of diabetes, particularly its risk
factors and complications and the need/ urgency of early diagnosis and management.

4.2 Manpower development and Strengthening of existing diabetes management capabilities.

The program shall provide continuing training and education(refreshers/updates) of core trainers and implementors, both in the national and field level. It shall include strengthening of treatment/management capabilities of existing and proposed diabetes clinics taking into utmost consideration basic quality assurance and standardization of
procedures and techniques appropriate to each locality (community and hospital settings). 

4.3 Service delivery/ Integration of diabetes prevention and control at the community level

The program shall provide for the integration and provision of services at the lowest possible level of community health care interventions. This means primary prevention concentrating on nutrition, exercise and anti—smoking advocacy; secondary prevention: screening/ early detection, simple/basic management/counseling, referral and/or definitive care and; tertiary prevention: management of complications, continuing care and follow—up, including rehabilitation)

4.4 Monitoring/Evaluation

To monitor/ assess and evaluate program implementation, its processes and adequacy. Baseline data will be established. It shall be a built—in component and there will be a periodic, process and impact evaluation every year and five years thereafter and /or depending on the need of the program. 

4.5 Research

The program shall support research/studies in the clinical(registry shall be established), behavioral(knowledge, attitudes and practices) and epidemiological(trends and determinants of diabetes) areas.



5. Implementing Guidelines

5.1 Health promotion and education

This shall be a coordinative and collaborative activity. The program shall identify specific messages, prepare and design communications plan with the support and guidance from the Public Information and Health Education Service(PIHES). Each of the collaborating agencies and organizations shall have Information Desks at the national and regional levels for the dissemination of diabetes information. 

5.2 Manpower development and Strengthening of diabetes management capabilities

The core of trainers(medical centers/regional hospitals/regional health offices) and field implementors(provincial/district and municipal) shall have access to continuing training and education as provided in a specific protocol.

The necessary resources for diabetes diagnosis, management and rehabilitation appropriate at every level of care shall be provided from internal and external sources.

5.3 Service delivery 

The program shall develop specific administrative and clinical policies and procedures for the delivery of basic health care services for diabetes appropriate at each level
of care. This shall be embodied in a manual of operations.

5.4 Monitoring and evaluation

An annual review of program implementation will help to compare the actual and projected program processes and outcomes. At the completion of the first year of the program, an assessment can be made whether strategies to meet the objective have been implemented. After 3—5 years, program priority objectives and strategies could have been identified and corresponding reprogramming shall be effected.

5.4 Research 

Important biomedical and treatment advances are being made for diabetes. Translation or application of research findings may improve patient welfare. Research support and activities are needed- but they should be compatible with national resources and overall priorities.



6. Advisory Council

The program shall have an Advisory Council to advise on issues of planning, policy, priority setting, training, research, resource allocation, program operation and evaluation.

Membership shall be both multidisciplinary and intersectoral, representing the diabetes field, health care, academic, research, business, voluntary and consumer communities. They shall be recognized by the Secretary of Health upon recommendation from leading experts in the field of diabetes and related disciplines as selection comes from a pool of credible nominees. A high level of commitment is desired because ultimately the success of the program is based on the committee’s enthusiasm, commitment and willingness to advocate for resources.

Specifically, it shall advise on objectives and priorities in a timely and systematic way. They shall meet regularly to review program progress and make recommendations. Staff support should be available from the Non-Communicable Disease Control Service(to be headed by a designated National Diabetes Program Coordinator/ Assistant Executive Officer for the Program) and a corresponding/counterpart from a leading concerned non-government organization for technical and administrative matters.

This shall be composed of a Chairman, an Executive Officer and five members from concerned agencies/organizations. The Chairman shall call and preside over all council meetings, provide direction in the formulation of policies/plans and programs
and performs other duties as may be assigned. The Executive Officer(Director of Non— Communicable Disease Control Service) shall perform liaison work between the Advisory Council, Office of Public Health Services, Office for Hospitals, Facilities, Standards and Regulations, etc.. He shall be responsible for the preparation and submission of periodic reviews of program’s progress, monitor program implementation at field and hospital leVel, recommend policies and programs to the Council and performs other duties as may be assigned.

The Council shall be advisory and recommendatory to the Secretary of Health and shall submit periodic reports.



7. Timetable of Implementation 

Phase I- Immediate: 1995 

7.1 Establish/strengthen multi-sectoral coordination/collaboration. Identify concerned government and non-government organizations in the implementation of a diabetes mellitus prevention and control program.

7-2. Support legislative agenda. Lobby for adequate appropriations necessary for implementation of the program.

7.3 Strengthen the Consortium of Government Diabetes Clinics under the Hospitals as Centers of Wellness Program to address/absorb current and prospective cases

7.4 Establish baseline data, conduct a national prevalence study as a basis of implementation of strategic intervention measures for the prevention and control of diabetes mellitus in the country.


Phase II— Intermediate: 1996—1999

7.5 Identify/ Implement apprppriate strategies and allocation of needed resources particularly for the comprehensive, integrated community—based interventions.


Phase III— Long-term: 2000 and onward

7.6 To have established effective surveillance system for diabetes mellitus and its related risk factors and complications,

7.7 To have established health promotion and education strategies for health care providers to the community, the family and individuals affected. 

7.8 An improved health care program for diabetes in the field health services, thus reducing morbidity, disability and mortality from diabetes and its complicatons and eventually, adapt the program for other chronic diseases(cardiovascular, blindness, rehabilitaton, etc.) prevention and control in the community utilizing the INTERHEALTH model of the WHO.



8. Repealing clause 

All Orders, circulars, Administrative issuances which are inconsistent with this Order, are hereby repealed or amended accordingly. 



9. Effectivity

This Order takes effect fifteen (15) days after publication in the Official Gazette or in two newspaper of general circulation.



</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO, JR.., M.D., M.H.A.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
