Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>11/07/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO.17-Bs.,1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Health Information, Education, Communication and Promotion Policies of the Department of Health</subject>

<body>

The Public Information and Health Education Service (PIHES) by virtue of Executive Order 119, Section 9 was organized as a program support service under the Office of the Chief of Staff and is mandated to provide IEC support for DOH programs as well as formulate policies and guidelines on health information, education and communication.

By virtue of this mandate, the following IEC and health promotion policies and guidelines are recommended for the effective implementation of the IEC Component of the different programs of DOH.

1. PIHES will serve as the clearing house of IEC materials (both print and broadcast) to be produced by the different services/programs of DOH:

1.1 Sponsored IEC materials
1.2 In-house production 
1.3 Contracted out IEC materials

2. Communication campaign of DOH from the national and regional levels will be implemented in close coordination with PIHES and local government units.

3. PIHES will provide the Regional Health Office with prototype IEC materials. The Regional Health Office in consultation with the local government units will translate the IEC materials in their major dialects, if needed.

The region will be in-charge of finalizing and producing the IEC materials.

4. DOH will establish a multi-media center to provide and control in house facility for the development, production and dissemination of training and health education materials in a variety of media formats, including a computer based inter-active multi-media.

This Center could provide training for HEPOs and PIOs of DOH as well as of the LGUs (Provincial HEPOs, HEPO Designates)to develop their capabilities in IEC production.

5. PIHES in coordination with HMDTS will be responsible for the training of HEPOS, HEPO designates and PIOs of the different service programs and local government units. 

6. PIHES will coordinate with IPS, ENHR, CHS, LGAMS, DLLO and HPDS in the formulation of policies, strategies, development of programs and projects, research activities related to health promotion, disease prevention and social mobilization.

7. PIHES will serve as the Public Education and Social Mobilization Center of all DOH central and ﬁeld offices providing regular and updated reports to the health personnel in the major thrusts and programs of DOH through DOH newsletter and other forms of information dissemination.

8. PIHES in coordination with service concerned will be responsible for the development of guidelines for the distribution of IEC materials to the ﬁeld units.

8.1 Funds must be available by the respective services concerned for the timely distribution of materials using the fastest cost of handling.

9. PIHES will coordinate closely with PLS in the preparation of RIVs, specification of IEC materials of the various services.

10. PIHES will chair the intra-department IEC Socmob committee which will integrate related strategies and health messages for a cost effective and cost efficient management of health promotion activities.

11. Regional HEPOs and PIOs will provide technical assistance to local HEPOs and PIOs in the development, production, distribution and in monitoring utilization of IEC materials.

12. PIOs of various offices will provide PIHES with regular updates, timely information on health issues/problems pertaining to their specific areas.

13. PIHES will monitor daily news releases for misinformation on health concerns and in coordination with the Office of the Secretary Will release accurate information to the press immediately.

14. Through media, PIHES will provide the public with updated health information to guide them in disease prevention and health promotion.

14.1 PIHES in coordination with the OSEC will conduct regular press conferences, media briefing to update media on DOH programs and health issues.

14.2 PIHES will provide media written updates and broadcaster’s manuals regularly.

This Order, shall take effect upon approval


</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO,JR.,M.D,MHA</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 