Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
SAN LAZARO COMPOUND, RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ, MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80 

<date>02/08/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 4 s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Creation of the Central Committee on Procurement System (CCPS) with the support of several working committees as a means of strengthening the DOH Procurement System.</subject>

<body>

To address the recurring problems identified in the Department of Health (DOH) procurement system need the joint effort of the requisitioner/end user; the logistic group who provides the need; and, the management group who decides on issues and declare policies brought before it. In view of the foregoing, a Central Committee on Procurement system (CCPS) is hereby created to coordinate, rationalize and facilitate the operation, efficiency, effectiveness and economy of the procurement system with the following general operational objectives:

1. To ensure the quality and availability of resources necessary in the implementation of programs/projects at the right time and place and at reasonable price more advantageous to the government; and,

2. To lessen the time lag in the procurement system by means of coordination among the different committees.

The Specific operational objectives are:

1. To monitor bidding time tables and compliance of delivery schedules as specified in the Purchase Order (PO);

2. To monitor compliance to government accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

3. To review policies and guidelines of the various Bidding Committees and Technical Evaluation Committees.

4. To monitor the performance of the procurement system for the account of DOH and the suppliers;

5. Facilitate the conduct of research to ensure a dynamic, appropriate and relevant system responsive to present needs; and,

6. To render “unreadable text” reports and recommend policies of Redirection to DOH Procurement Committee (MANCOM).


I. COMPOSITION, TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF CCPS

The CCPS shall be headed by the overall “unreadable text” Coordinator supported by working committees with functions properly defined for organizational and operational facility, the Director, Procurement and Logistics Service (PLS), in addition to his/her duties shall functions as Deputy to the Overall System Coordinator. Likewise, PLS shall provide staff support in the form of a Secretariat who shall primarily keep records and document all proceedings of the Committee. As necessary, the Overall System Coordinator shall organise and designate his/her own staff support for efficient coordination and management of the system.

All designated members and officers of CCPS shall hold office only for (1) year unless otherwise extended by the Management Committee and/or Secretary of Health.

All funds for the purpose of operationalising the CCPS shall be charged initially to the Primary Health Care Fund of the Office of the Secretary, thereafter, shall be incorporated to the regular allocation and budget of PLS.

In case where the need for immediate management interventions and decisions to resolve procurement issues and concerns, A CCPS ADVISORY BODY shall be created with memberships designated and jointly identified by the Overall System Coordinator and the Secretary of Health. If necessary, CCPS can also hire its own consultant relative to its operation. The length of service and source of fund for the said consultant shall be determined by the CCPS Advisory Body.

The Office for Legal Affairs (OLA) of this Department shall provide legal services to the CCPS and shall designate a Legal Adviser with permanent Alternate in case the former has to attend to hearings and some other legal functions for the department during CCPS meetings. The Legal Adviser or his/her Permanent Alternate shall not be a member of any committee and shall not have voting privilege.

The Health Manpower Development and Training service (HMDTS) of this Department shall develop syllabi and conduct orientation training together with PLS and out-going CCPS members to new designated memberships and officers of CCPS every last month of each year. All new members and officers of CCPS shall start their term of office on the first working day of the year.

II. THE WORKING COMMITTEE

1. COMMITTEE ON ACCREDITATION:

To ensure DOH transact business only with competent and legitimate suppliers and contractors, herewith are the functions of the Committees which covers suppliers on all categories including drugs and medicines, devises and equipments and catering services.

1.1 Accepts, screen, examine and process for purposes of accreditation, supplier’s/contractor’s qualification prior to their participation in any DOH procurement activities.

1.2 Prepare and update periodically a list of accredited suppliers/contractors to the various committees showing their names; specific line of goods handles; and business capabilities based on capitalization and new worth.

1.3 Keep a record of the performance of the duly accredited suppliers/ contractors as to their compliance to policies, conditions or agreements defined in the contract or purchase order, specifications or descriptions of the items called for, and delivery within the prescribed period as submitted by the concerned units or committees.

1.4 Issue certification of accreditation as required by the various bidding committees.

The Accreditation Committee shall secure from the supplier / contractor its latest financial statements duly audited by an independent Certified Public Accountant or in the absence of such, financial statements duly sworn to and notarised by a Notary Public. Likewise, it shall make official inquiries from various government agencies relative to supplier’s/contractor’s licensing, registration, tax and others.

The conduct of accreditation shall be done throughout the year and shall be announced publicly and posted in the DOH bulletin boards. In case of renewal of accreditation, only those documents identified needing updating in the applicants file shall be required for renewal of accreditation.


Inspection of the purpose of accreditation shall be done unannounced with the semblance of a surprise visits. 

The Certificate of Accreditation issued by the Committee on Accreditation during the process of bidding shall suffice to complete the required documents of the bidders in relation to their accreditation. The Certificate of Accreditation is valid only for one (1) year.

The Committee on Accreditation should have at least five (5) members specifically with an Accountant and Clerk/Typist and members knowledgeable in:

a. financial analysis
b. line of business of applicants establishments
c. Business organization and techniques
d. Logistics needs of DOH

2. COMMITTEE ON INSPECTION

Upon delivery of items called for in a Purchase or Job Order, or any contract in relation to the delivery of goods and services, the Committee on Inspection shall verify the quality and quantity of the items delivered in compliance to the specifications stated in the order. They shall submit the Inspection Report to PLS copy furnished the CCPS, Committee on Accreditation and the end-user. The Committee on Inspection shall be responsible for the participation of other agencies (e.g. Commission on audit, Bureau of Food and Drugs and others) required to complete the inspection process. Likewise, the shall be responsible for the conduct of any pre-inspection activity and the corresponding report necessary for repairs, disposals and purchase to replace non-serviceable/condemned items. The Inspection Team shall be guided by the following rules and regulations:

2.1 There should be an Inspection Pool with a maximum of fifteen (15) members consisting of different disciplines assigned by the Committee on Inspection.

2.2 Each Inspector shall be assigned a number which will be drawn from a  lot in selecting the team members for a particular inspection assignment.

2.3 For items delivered which do not required technical expertise, the assignment of three (3) inspectors for every delivery should be by drawing lot. For technical items which would require special knowledge and expertise, the end-user should send a representative as a member of the inspection team.

2.4 For items delivered which require no laboratory and special examinations, the inspection report shall be submitted to those specified above on the same day that the inspection was conducted. 

2.5 In case there is need to get sample for laboratory examinations, the random sampling should conform with the established procedure. Samples must be sealed without any bran name/s and only a code name be placed on the package or wrapper of samples. Samples must be submitted to the laboratory or to whoever would examine them on the same day they were taken from the delivery. 

2.6 In no case inspection by the agency be waived.

2.7 There should be close coordination between the TEC and the Inspection Committee. Such that during product demonstration the Inspection Committee should be invited.

3. THE BIDDING COMMITTEES

The Bidding Committees are as follows:

3.1 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC BIDDING FOR DRUGS & MEDICINES

This Committee shall take charge of conducting public biddings procured in bulk at the national or central office for drugs and medicines both for public health and hospital purposes including case, fluids, laboratory reagents, chemicals and pesticides.

3.2 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC BIDDING FOR HEALTH SUPPLIES, MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENTS:

This Committee shall take charge of conducting public biddings procured in bulk at the national office for both public health and hospital supplies, materials and equipments including radiologic films and their reagents, non-perishable or non-consumable supplies like stethoscopes, sphygmomanometers, needles and the likes, office and hospital equipments, furnishing and other supplies and metals not procured by the Procurement Service (PS) of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM). 

3.3 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC BIDDING FOR CONTRACTUAL SERVICES (including Preventive Maintenance)

This Committee shall take charge of conducting public biddings for contractual services like janitorial, security, hauling, customs brokerage, laundry, catering services and other contractual services needing public bidding.

3.4 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC BIDDING FOR INFRASTRUCTURE

This Committee shall perform the functions previously assigned to the CENTRAL OFFICE INFRASTRUCTURE previously assigned to  the CENTRAL OFFICE INFRASTRUCTURE BID AND AWARD COMMITTEE (COIBAC). To be known as Committee on Public Bidding for Infrastructure, it shall establish the DOH policies in the conduct of public bidding for new infrastructures, repairs, renovation or construction costing more than TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (P200,000.00) including the pre-qualification requirements of prospective bidders subject to the provisions of PD 1594.

3.5 COMMITTEE ON BIDDING FOR REPAIRS OF OFFICE EQUIPMENTS AND FACILITIES

This Committee shall handle the bidding for the repair of office equipments including renovations/repair/construction of buildings and other infrastructure projects amounting to TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND PESOS (P200,000.00) and below. It shall closely coordinate its operations with the General Services Section of the Administrative Service.

3.6 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC BIDDING FOR FOODSTUFF

This Committee shall cover all types of hospital foodstuff like commissary items, sea foods, meats, canned goods, cereals, grains and other type of preparation. It is responsible for providing hospitals their regular supply of foodstuff in the most reasonable price.

3.7 COMMITTEE ON BIDDING FOR REPAIRS OF VEHICLES

This Committee shall handle the bidding for the repair of all vehicles of the DOH at the national or central office. It shall closely coordinate its operations with the Transport Management Section of the Administrative Service.

3.8 COMMITTEE ON BIDDING FOR TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE

This Committee assumes the function of the Pre-qualification Evaluation and Awards Committee for Technical/ Consulting Services (PEVAC) through a process of selection identified in the PEVAC Implementing Rules and Regulations. It shall evaluate project proposals and compliance as described in the end-user’s Terms-of-Reference.

3.9 COMMITTEE FOR EMERGENCY AND NEGOTIATED PURCHASES

This Committee shall take charge of all emergency and negotiated purchases whether they be arising from bid failures, sole distributorship or any other highly justifiable cause based on existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Its activity shall be limited to the identification of supplier/s or contractor/s to which a particular emergency purchase or contract shall be awarded; and the conduct of negotiation with a particular supplier or contractor and the recommendation to award thereafter.

The various Bidding Committees shall conduct the following process outlines below:

a) Develop, submit for approval to CCPS, implement and monitor supplemental instructions, mechanisms, flow charts and other policies and/or guidelines necessary in the achievement of its goals and objectives.

b) Ensure that the established policies and supplemental instructions desired to guide the bidding process are well defined in the bid documents.

c) Prepare schedule of bidding in coordination with PLS.

d) Conduct the appropriate bidding activity as identified by PLS.

e) Make the required recommendations to the Secretary of Health after consultation with the Technical Evaluation Committee. The Secretary of Health shall transmit to PLS the approved recommendation for the preparation of Notice of Award.

d) All other functions that maybe required by the Overall System Coordinator/Secretary of Health.

4. TECHNICAL EVALUATION COMMITTEE

Committee accepted bids by proponents shall be reviewed, analyzed and evaluated by this Committee which shall be created by the CPPS and/or by the various Bidding Committees as described above. It may be created by categories of the items being bidder. The Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) shall be guided by the following rules and regulations:

4.1 The TEC shall be composed of technical people in authority and knowledgeable on a the product or items called for in a particular bidding.

4.2 The number of membership of the TEC or per category of TEC created shall be determined by the CCPS or the Committee concerned and by the necessity of the evaluation. A member of any TEC shall always be the end-user representative.

4.3 The TEC shall meet regularly until recommendation is submitted within ten (10) working days from the receipt of the bid documents. The Bid Committee concerned shall be informed in advance for special cases where the 10-day requirement may not be met.

4.4 Criteria or standard of evaluation and analysis to be used in a particular bidding should be spelled out and be known by the Bidding Committee concerned before the bidding day.

4.5 Recommendations of the TEC shall be forwarded to the concerned Bidding Committee for final review. This may be the basis of the said Committee for the preparation and submission of the recommendations to the Secretary of Health. 

5. COMMITTEE ON PROCUREMENT DEVELOPMENT RESEARCH

This Committee shall provide assistance in the conduct of research and other evaluation and analysis that maybe assigned by CCPS. Likewise, it shall serve as the technical group of the CCPS confirming any unfavourable information gathered against an applicant for accreditation; evaluating performance of the suppliers/contractors for purposes of providing accurate information for the track record of the establishment. The Committee shall device a form that can capture the performance of the accredited suppliers/contractors similar in concept introduced by the Administrative Order No. 90, s. 1968. This Committee shall recommend to the Secretary of Health through the Over-All System Coordinator the block-listing of a contractor/supplier or bidder for a period of time.

III. THE PROCUREMENT AND LOGISTICS SERVIE: Delineation of Function:

The CCPS was created to further strengthen the efficiency, the effectiveness and the economy of the procurement system. Likewise, the existence of the CCPS serves to maintain, checks and balances the process. The CCPS is in no way intended to replace the function of the Procurement and Logistics Service (PLS) of this Department. Specifically, the PLS shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

1. Consolidate the Annual Procurement Program (APP) submitted by the various Services and Units of the Department, thereafter, submitting to the PS of DBM the part of the APP to be procured by that Service.

2. Determine the mode of procurement of commodities called for in the Requisition and Issue Voucher (RIV) received from the various Services and Units.

3. Prepare bidding timetable and the step by step schedule of the bidding process in coordination with CCPS.

4. Prepare all documents required in the bidding process including the publication of Invitation to Bid in case of public bidding.

5. Issue bid documents to prospective bidders.

6. Issue notice of awards and purchase orders/contracts properly initialed and/or signed by the Chairman of the concerned Bid Committee.

7. Monitor the delivery of commodities and furnish copies to the CCPS, Committee on Accreditation and the end-users.

8. Accept deliveries of commodities requisitioned as well as donated items and see that all are properly accounted for.

9. Prepare delivery reports after completion of delivery of items copy furnished the CCPS, Committee on Inspection, Committee on Accreditation and the end-users.

10. Store and maintain properly all delivered and donated commodities; and manage the operation of the warehouse.

11. Witness the inspection and sampling of items by BFAD for analysis and by COA inspectors.

12. Prepare and follow-up processing of corresponding disbursement vouchers to effect timely payment of the supplies ordered and received.

13. “Unreadable text” supplies to requisitioner and distribute commodities in accordance with the distribution list issued by Program Managers/Service Directors concerned.

14. Issue equipments and other fixed assets and submit to General Service Division (GSD) original copy of Memorandum Receipts (MR).

15. Conduct quarterly physical inventory of supplies, materials, equipments and vehicles stored in the warehouses under the PLS supervision and periodically submits Inventory Reports to the Secretary of Health copy furnished the CCPS.

Department Circulars, Department Orders and all pertinent documents to implement, operationalize and support this Administrative Order shall be issued immediately after approval thereof. All memoranda and other issuances inconsistent with or contrary to the provision of this Administrative Order are hereby superseded or modified accordingly.

This Order shall take effect immediately. 

</body> 
<sign>JAIME Z. GALVEZ-TAN, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>
