Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>03/30/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 7-C s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Policies For the Prevention and Control of HIV Infections/AIDS in the Philippines</subject>


<body>


Considering the HIV and STD epidemiological situations in the Philippines and the experienced gained by the DOH, since the establishment of the National AIDS Prevention and Control Program in 1988, the policy statements contained in Administrative Order No. 57-A s. 1989 is hereby revised.

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) continues to pose a major threat to public health and the following policies shall form the basis for national strategies to prevent the spread of HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) in this country. The following policy statements will compliment the existing and future strategic documents of the National AIDS/STD Prevention and Control Program.


PROGRAM MANAGEMENT

1. Prevention of HIV infection shall be priority of the National AlDS Control Program.


STD and AIDS

2. Considering that STD infections increase an individual‘s susceptibility to HIV infection, STD prevention and control shall be incorporated into all activities of the National AIDS/STD Prevention and Control Program.

3. STD case management and prevention education shall focus on improving health care seeking behavior in persons with or at risk of STD infections, avoiding coercive measures or obstacles to equitable care and treatment.


INFORMATION EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION

4. AIDS education shall be integrated into existing school curricula of elementary, high school and college levels.

5. Communication campaigns on HIV/AIDS shall form part of an information delivery system integrated into other programs of the Department of Health.

6. Information, education and social support programs shall foster a spirit of understanding and compassion for people with HIV/AIDS. 


PROTECTIVE MEASURES

7. To minimize the transmission of HIV infection, protective measures including condom usage shall be promoted for persons with at risk behavior. These protective measures shall be made available and widely accessible.


BLOOD AND BLOOD PRODUCTS

8. All blood and blood products for transfusion, and organs and tissues for transplant shall be screened for HIV. 

9. Non-remunerated voluntary blood donation shall be promoted, and donors shall undertake risk assessment prior to donation. Education of the prescribers of blood shall focus on reducing unnecessary transfusions.


HIV ANTIBODY TEST

10. No mandatory testing shall be required including for tourists, visa applicants, for persons prior to marriage, for pregnant women, or for persons applying for insurance or employment.

ll. Persons who engage in at-risk behavior shall be encouraged to undergo voluntary
testing.

12 Pre- and post-test counselling, including pre-testing informed consent shall be required for person undergoing testing


CONFIDENTIALITY

13. Information on testing, counselling and care of individuals shall remain conﬁdential.


STATISTICS

14. Statistical data on HIV/AIDS shall be maintained by the Department of Health.


HEALTH CARE SERVICES

15. Persons with HIV/AIDS shall be referred to available conﬁdential counselling, health care facilities and support services.

16. No person with or suspected of having HIV infection shall be denied health care services.

17. Health care personnel shall be encouraged to use universal precautions to effectively protect themselves and their patients from blood-borne infections including HIV.


DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES

18. No person with or suspected of having HIV infection shall be subjected to any discriminatory or stigmatizing practices in the provision of services, employment or travel, nor shall they be subjected to quarantine or isolation.


AIDS IN THE WORKPLACE

19. Workers with HIV infection who are healthy should be treated the same as any other worker. Workers with HIV-related illness, including AIDS, should be treated the same as any other worker with an illness.


EMPOWERMENT

20. Empowerment of people with HIV/AIDS and their participation will be major considerations in the design of HIV-related programs and projects.


Specific guidelines to implement the above policies shall be formulated and widely disseminated to all programs and services involved in the prevention and control of HIV infection and AIDS in the Philippines.

Any order to the contrary is hereby superseded.

This order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in two (2) newspapers of general circulation or after publication in the official Gazettee.



 

</body> 
<sign>JAIME Z. GALVEZ-TAN, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>




\aids unit