Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>02/02/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2 s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Amending Administrative Order No. 23 s. 1994 Dated January 20, 1994 with the Subject Roles and Responsibilities of the DOH management Team for the Health Finance Development Project (USAID Project No. 492-0446)</subject>


<body>

The Administrative Order No. 23 s. 1994. Dated January 20,1994 with the Roles and Responsibilities of the DOH Management Team for the HFDP as amended by Administrative Order No. 37 s. 1994 dated August 24,1994 is further amended herewith to include the following revisions to reflect the present set-up in the Department:

The section which reads "Below are the roles and responsibilities of the DOH Project Management Team for HFDP.


1. PROJECT DIRECTOR: This position will be filled by the Undersecretary and Chief of Staff and will have the following responsibilities. 

1) provide policy direction and general management oversight for the HFDP

2) brief the Secretary of Health on the progress and outputs produced through the project

3) approve programmatic plans which establish the outputs, general directions and fund commitment levels on behalf of the DOH, and endorse these to USAID

4) issue directives which govern the project's organization and management, and the 
creation of structural or ad hoc organizational units

5) conduct periodic meetings at least quarterly to monitor the progress made by the project toward achieving anticipated outputs

6) represent the HFDP to DOH management, USAID, and in interdepartmental and multisectoral policy fora.
  

2. PROJECT MANAGER: This position will be filled by the Undersecretary for Health Facilities, Standards, and Regulation, and will have the following responsibilities:

1) provide direct management oversight for the HFDP

2) provide general supervision for the Upecon cooperative agreement and the MSH contract

3) supervise the implementation of activities in the five program areas

4) review and approve comprehensive annual operational plans, and revisions or modifications to the annual operational plans, and endorse to USAIID

5) monitor progress toward achieving benchmarks and outputs agreed upon for HFDP and approve benchmarks once they have been satisfactorily fulfilled

6) submit monthly progress reports to the Project Director and senior DOH management

7) approve all training activities funded through the Upecon cooperative agreement and the MSH institutional contract

8) approve all publications issued through the HFDP 

9) coordinate HFDP with other DOH, USAID, or other donor funded activities related to HFDP

1O) liaise with USAID on all HFDP related matters


REPORTS TO: Project Director


3. DEPUTY PROJECT MANAGER: This position will be filled by the Chief of Hospital, Rizal Medical Center, and will have the following responsibilities:

1) assist the Project Manager with the following responsibilities:

* provide direct management oversight for the HFDP
* supervise the implementation of activities in the five program areas
* liaise with USAID on HFDP related matters

2) provide direct supervision for the Upecon cooperative agreement and the MSH institutional contract

3) coordinate the preparation of

* HPDP programmatic plans
* annual operational plans for MSH and Upecon
* comprehensive integrated annual operational plans
* revisions to programmatic or operational plans

4) develop and implement a system which monitors progress in the five program areas, the Upecon cooperative agreement, and the MSH contract

5) monitor the disbursement of funds from the MSH contract and the Upecon cooperative agreement

6) prepare and submit a monthly monitoring report to the Project Manager which describes the progress and pace of implementation, and reports the disbursement of funds on the HFDP

7) conduct an annual performance evaluation of the Upecon agreement and the MSH contract.


REPORTS TO: Project Manager 


is revised as follows:

"Below are the roles and responsibilities for the DOH Project Management Team for HFDP.

1. PROJECT DIRECTOR: This position will be filled by the Undersecretary for Hospital Facilities Standards and Regulation and, will have the following responsibilities:

1) provide policy direction and general management oversight for the HFDP

2) brief the Secretary of Health on the progress and outputs produced through the project

3) approve programmatic plans which establish the outputs, general directions and fund commitment levels on behalf of the DOH, and endorse these to USAID

4) issue directives which govern the project's organization and management, and the creation of structural or ad hoc organizational units

5) conduct periodic meetings at least quarterly to monitor the progress made by the project toward achieving anticipated outputs 

6) represent the HFDP to DOH management, USAID, and in interdepartmental and multisectoral policy fora.


2. PROJECT MANAGER: This position will be filled by the Chief of Hospital, Rizal Medical Center, and will have the following responsibilities:

1) provide direct management oversight for the HFDP 

2) provide direct supervision for the Upecon cooperative agreement and the MSH contract

3) supervise the implementation of activities in the five program areas 

4) develop and implement a system which monitors progress in the five program areas, the Upecon cooperative agreement, and the MSH contract

5) coordinate the preparation of

* HFDP programmatic plans
* annual operational plans for MSH and Upecon
* comprehensive integrated annual operational plans
* revisions to programmatic or operational plans 

6) review and approve comprehensive annual operational plans, and revisions or modifications to the annual operational plans, and endorse to USAID

7) monitor the disbursement of funds from the MSH contract, and the Upecon cooperative agreement

8) monitor progress toward achieving benchmarks and outputs agreed upon for HFDP, and approve benchmarks once they have been satisfactorily fulfilled

9) prepare and submit a monthly monitoring report to the Project Director and senior DOH management which describes the progress and pace of implementation, and reports to the disbursement of funds on the HFDP

10) approve all training activities funded through the Upecon cooperative agreement and the MSH institutional contract

11) approve all publications issued through the HFDP

12) conduct an annual performance evaluation of the Upecon agreement and the MSH contract

13) coordinate HFDP with other DOH, USAID, or other donor funded activities related to HFDP

14) liaise with USAID on all HFDP related matters


REPORTS TO: Project Director


As thus amended by Administrative Order No. 37 s. 1994 dated August 24,1994 and this Administrative Order, Administrative Order No. 23 s. 1994 is still in effect. 

This order shall take effect immediately.

</body> 
<sign>Jaime Z. Galvez Tan, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>
       

HPDS

