Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
SAN LAZARO COMPOUND, RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>09/13/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 15-A s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines Governing the Implementation of the Sangkap Pinoy Seal (SPS) Program and the Collection and Disbursement of Fees Generated from the Program</subject>


<body>

PURPOSE: This order is issued to prescribe the general guidelines and related procedures in the implementation and collection and disbursement of funds derived from payments of food manufacturers participating in the Department of Health's (DOH) Sangkap Pinoy Seal Program pursuant to Section 4 General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act, CY 1995.


RATIONALE:

Deficiencies in Vitamin A, iron and iodine have long been recognized as significant nutritional problems in the Philippines affecting millions of mothers and children.

Worldwide attention to these problems has brought global commitment among many countries to sign a declaration committing to the virtual elimination by the year 2000, of vitamin A and iodine deﬁciencies and signiﬁcant reduction of the levels of anemia during the World Summit for Children in New York City in 1990. Subsequent meetings on Ending Hidden Hunger in Canada in 1991 and the International Conference on Nutrition in Rome in 1992 further reinforced the global commitment to eliminate these problems by the end of this decade.

At the hornefront President Fidel V. Ramos has committed to actively support local initiatives on ending micronutrient malnutrition such as Araw ng Sangkap Pinoy (ASAP), a national campaign where micronutrient supplements like vitamin A, iron and iodine (locally termed as Sangkap Pinoy) and vegetable seeds are distributed. This move was further reinforced by the issuance of a Memorandum by President Ramos directing all heads of agencies to contribute to efforts on ending hidden hunger.

To be able to sustain the gains of ASAP, food fortiﬁcation or the addition of essential nutrients to commonly consumed foods is generally recognized as the most effective and long term intervention to eliminate micronutrient deﬁciencies. But to make this viable calls for collaboration with the food industry to fortify food products widely consumed by the general public. Along this vision was born the SPS Prog1am of the Department of Health in collaboration with other government agencies and non-government organizations.


DEFINITION OF TERMS:

Sangkap Pinoy Seal Program - is a strategy to encourage food manufacturers to fortify food products with the essential nutrients at levels approved by the DOH. The program authorizes food manufacturers to use the SEAL of acceptance after having met a set of defined criteria as a means to encourage food manufacturers. The consumers can used the SEAL as a guide for selection of high—quality fortiﬁed food products.

Fortiﬁcation - is the addition of nutrients to processed foods at levels above the
natural state. 

Fortiﬁcant - vitamins and minerals added to food to increase its nutritive level/value. These substances must remain stable and biologically available after being added to the food vehicle, during storage and during normal food preparation procedures.

Product Category - a group or classiﬁcation of any kind of product, e.g. noodles.

Product Brand - a trademark to identify a class of goods as being the product of a single firm or manufacturer, e.g. LUCKY ME ! Instant Mami Noodles.

Revolving Fund - consists of receipts derived from business-type activities or departments bureaus, offices or agencies authorized by law to be self-perpetuating and liquidating to cover operational expenses of the speciﬁc activities of the agency subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.


GENERAL GUIDELINES:

A. Implementation of Sangkap Pinoy Seal Program

1. The Nutrition Service (NS)-DOH shall be the agency responsible for the implementation of the program. Its management shall be handled by a Technical Board composed of Directors from NS-DOH, Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD) -DOH, National Nutrition Council — Department of Agriculture (NNC—DA), Food and Nutrition Research Institute-Department of Science and Technology (FNRI-DOST), and Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).

2. The food manufacturer shall be required to submit the necessary documents as indicated in the Manual of Operations of SPS Program prior to approval of their application.

3. Upon approval, the food manufacturer shall pay a non—refundable processing fee of P 500.00 for every product category/brand being applied for and a contract fee of P 8,000.00 to the Department of Health.

4. The food manufacturer shall be allowed the non-exclusive use of the SEAL on a continuing basis, provided a yearly assessment fee of P 5,000.00 is complied with. Furthermore, the approved fortiﬁed food product must have been found to have
consistently maintained the required fortificant levels set by the DOH as gauged from the
monitoring results and product analysis and that the food manufacturer has abided by all the conditions stipulated in the contract.

5. All approved products shall be regularly monitored and subjected to laboratory analysis.


B: Collection and Disbursement of Funds

1. All payments shall be received by the Department of Health. A processing fee of P500.00, a contract fee of P8, 000. 00 and a yearly assessment fee of P5,000. 00 shall be
collected from every product category/brand being applied for, scheduled as follows:

A. Payment of P 500.00 as processing fee prior to approval of application

B. Payment of P 8,000.00 as contract fee upon approval of application 

C. Payment of P 5,000.00 as yearly assessment fee

2. All income derived from payments of food manufacturers shall constitute a revolving fund to be used exclusively to cover the expenses necessary for the implementation of the Sangkap Pinoy Seal Program.

3. The availment of such income shall be subject to a special budget pursuant to Section 35 of Book VI, Executive Order No. 292 (Administrative Code of 1987).

4. All proceeds from such payments shall be deposited in a government depository bank under a separate bank account. 

5. The fund shall be utilized to augment the funds of the NS—DOH appropriated for the implementation of the Sangkap Pinoy Seal Program to cover the following expenditures: 

a. Food product sampling 
b. Honorarium of Technical Board per approved product
c. Daily subsistence allowance during the conduct of monitoring and/or plant visit
d. Travelling allowance
e. Office supplies and materials
f. IEC materials to include print and media

6. Interest income from the revolving fund shall be remitted to the National Treasury.

7. The Office of the Management Service—Department of Health (DOH) through the Secretary of Health shall submit to the Department of Budget and Management a Quarterly Report of Income and Expenditure, copy furnished the House Committee on Appropriations, the Senate Committee on finance and the Nutrition Service-DOH.


C. Accounting System and Procedure

The accounting system and procedure on the establishment and operation of the revolving fund for Nutrition Service-DOH under the Sangkap Pinoy Seal Program shall be in accordance with COA Circular No. 91-349 dated January 18, 1991 and other pertinent rules and regulations prescribed by ﬁscal agencies of government.



</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO, JR., M.D., M.H.A.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

