Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>02/15/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 4-B s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the implementation of the 1995 Physical Plant Maintenance Program for Retained Hospitals and Health Facilities, Offices and all other buildings of the Department of Health</subject>


<body>

I. BACKGROUND


A. The Physical Plant Maintenance Program of the Dept. of Health is part of the overall DOH Health Infrastructure Program, fulfilling one of the target objectives of the latter which is the institution of preventive and corrective maintenance system for physical plant and building  equipment of retained hospitals and health facilities, offices and all other buildings of the DOH.


B. The Physical Plant Maintenance Program will consist of two major activities namely Preventive Maintenance and Corrective Maintenance Works.

1. Preventive Maintenance Work pertains to planned, scheduled and cyclic tasks of parts replacement, condition monitoring and general gathering of information in order to prevent untimely breakdown of building elements to maintain their desired operating performance levels;

2. Corrective Maintenance Work involves repair of building-elements to correct confirmed abnormalities or deterioratng conditions. It may also include the installation of new building parts or elements to fit changing office or space needs.


C. For 1995, the funding source for Physical Plant Preventive Maintenance Works will be taken from the MOOE funds of each hospital or office of the DOH.


D. Also, for 1995, the amount alloted for Physical Plant Corrective Maintenance Works is inputted in the non-infrastracture capital outlay of each hospital or office of the DOH.




II. PROGRAM ORGANIZATION AND MACHINERY


A. The Health Infrastructure Service (INFRA) of the DOH under the Office for Hospital Facilities, Standards and Regulations (OHFSR) shall maintain the overall management, including monitoring, of the two major activities of the Maintenance Program.


B. The INFRA will be provided by the Regional Health Field Offices (RHOs) with the technical stuff counterpart in the management, including monitoring, of the Maintenance Program for hospitals and offices under their respective jurisdiction.


C. The execution of the Program will be done by the designated maintenance staff of all hospitals and offices and shall be supervised by the Administrative Division of said hospitals and offices.


D. The system for the Maintenance Program including scheduling, execution, and monitoring procedures, will be based on DOH uniform standards and technical guidelines which are detailed in two available reference manuals prepared by the INFRA, to wit: Manual for Schedule of Physical Plant Maintenance Program and Manual for Maintenance of Health Facilities




III. GUIDELINES


A. PRETENTIVE MAINTENANCE

For Preventive Maintenance Work, the activities and the corresponding roles and functions of the concerned staff are described below:

1. The request for budget or funds for preventive maintenance works should be initiated by every hospital and office and should be reflected in their annual Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses Program.

2. The execution of the preventive maintenance works will generally include:

a. Preparation of Work Item Documents and Drawings -- by Maintenance Staff

b. Procurement of Work Items -- by Procurement Staff

c. Execution of Work -- by Maintenance Staff or through Contract Services

d. Acceptance of Work -- by Chief of Hospital or by Head of Office, as the case may be.

3. All procurement procedures for preventive maintenance works shall be subject to auditing and accounting rules and regulations. They shall be subject to auditing and accounting rules and regulations. They shall also follow provisions set forth in DOH A.O. 17 s. 1993.


B. CORRECTIVE MAINTENANCE

For Corrective Maintenance Work, the activities and the corresponding roles and functions of the concerned staff are described below:

1. The request for budget or funds for corrective maintenance works should be initiated by every hospital and office and should be reflected either in their annual Maintenance and Order Operating Expenses Program or in their Annual Capital Outlay Program. For 1995, all retained hospitals have been instructed by the INFRA to include corrective maintenance work in their non-infra projects listing.

2. The execution of the corrective maintenance works will generally include:

a. Preparation of Work Item, Documents and Drawings -- by Maintenance Staff

b. Procurement of Work Items -- by Procurement Staff

c. Execution of Work -- by Maintenance Staff or through Contract Services

d. Acceptance of Work -- by Chief of Hospital or by Head of Office, as the case may be.

3. All procurement procedures for preventive maintenance works shall be subject to auditing and accounting rules and regulations. They shall be subject to auditing and accounting rules and regulations. They shall also follow provisions set forth in DOH A.O. 17 s. 1993.

4. Wherever applicable, procurement procedures for corrective maintenance works shall also comply with PD 1594 Rules and Regulations for the Implementation of Government Infrastructure Projects.

5. For monitoring purposes, of corrective maintenance work, every hospital and office shall provide the INFRA with a monthly status report using the standard-format prescribed by the INFRA in the reference manuals (item II-D).




IV. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE


A. The INFRA shall provide the necessary orientation training and technical assistance to hospital and office maintenance staff in the application of the DOH uniform standards and technical guidelines for the Maintenance Program.


B. The INFRA , through the help of their RHO counterparts, will distribute the reference manuals (item II.D) and may likewise provide the same orientation training and technical assistance, to devolved hospitals and health facilities and offices.


This ORDER takes effect immediately. 

</body> 
<sign>JAIME Z. GALVEZ TAN, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 
/gdlines1-4impl/31-wsS
