 Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>06/04/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 21 s. 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Guidelines for the Procurement of Equipment for Hospitals</subject>

<body>

Acquisition of equipment is an administrative job that any government agency has to undertake in order to change old and non-operational ones or to have new ones to augment its inventory of mission - essential equipment. This process, however, requires huge amount of government funds.

Realizing the need to undertake the process of acquisition and also the efficiency in the use of government funds, the Department of Health set some guidelines on procurement of hospital equipment in accordance with the existing laws and regulations that will ensure economy, effectiveness, and efficiency in the operations of the hospital.

The following are use guidelines for the Procurement of Equipment for Hospitals:


1. Hospital equipment shall be bidded by the hospital or negotiated subject to the provisions of Section 1 of E.0. 301 s. 1987 to wit;

Any provision of law, decree, executive order or other issuances to the contrary not withstanding, no contract for public services or furnishing supplies, materials and equipment to the government or any of its branches, agencies or instrumentalities shall be renewed or entered into without public bidding, except under any of the following situations:

a) whenever the supplies are urgently needed to meet an emergency which may involve the loss of or danger to life and / or property;

b) whenever the supplies are to be used in connection with a project or activity which cannot be delayed without causing detriment to the public service; 

c) whenever the materials are sold by an exclusive distributor or manufacturer who does not have sub dealers selling at lower prices and for which no suitable substitute can be attained elsewhere at mere advantageous terms to the government;

d) Whenever the supplies under procurement have been unsuccessfully placed on bid for at least two consecutive times, either due to lack of bidders or the offers received in each instance were exorbitant or non conforming to specifications;

e) In cases where it is apparent that the requisition of the needed supplies through negotiated purchase is most advantageous to the government to be determined by the Department Head concerned; and 

f) Whenever the purchase is made from an agency of the government


2. Authority to Undertake Bulk Purchases

Per R.A. No 8174 General Appropriations Act January 1 - December 31, 1996, page 574 states that ”The Department of Health is authorized; subject to auditing laws, rules and regulations, to undertake bulk procurement of drugs, medicines, medical and dental supplies, equiument and instruments for all the agencies and field units under its supervision including those in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, to obtain volume discounts and ensure better quality of items delivered; PROVIDED, That funds allocated for the purchase of drugs, medicines, medical and dental supplies end materials shall he equitably allocated by region; PROVIDED FURTHER, That the drugs, medicines and medical and dental supplies and materials so purchased shall be equitably distributed by legislative district; PROVIDED, FINALLY, That a quarterly report of such purchases and distribution shall be submitted to the a Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate not later than thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter.


3. Equipment to be procured shall be among the approved list from the Department of Budget and Management (DBM). Any modification shall be approved by the Department of Health Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation (DOH-OHFSR). Likewise, the DOH-OHFSR shall inform the DBM of such approved changes.


4. All procurement of hospital equipment shall follow the specifications set by the end-user provided such specifications shall not fall below the standard set by the DOH - Central Office (please see attached DOH Standard Technical Specification of Hospital Equipment). Furthermore, acceptance testing of selected radiological equipment shall be done by DOH - Central Office.
    
   
</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA N. REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


OHFSR/HOMS
