<date>07/22/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 26, s. 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Project Implementation Arrangements for Integrated Community Health Services Project (ICHSP) and Creation of Organizational Structure.</subject>

<body>

The Integrated Community Health Services Project (ICHSP) is a comprehensive response of the Department of Health (DOH) to devolution transition problems and the critical health situation in the country. It will provide models for evolving DOH and Local Government Units (LGU) systems. 

In partnership With the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID), the Project Will cover the following six (6)  provinces which were chosen based on a set criteria: Kalinga, Apayao, Palawan, Guimaras, Surigao del Norte, South Cotabato.

The Project consists of three (3) components, i.e., Component I - Community Health Service Support; Component II - Integrated Provincial Health Service Delivery System - Subsystem; Component III - Strengthening DOH Capacity.

The following Project Implementing Arrangements for ICHSP are hereby issued to ensure effective completion of the said project: 


A. Project Executing Agency

The Department of Health (DOH), as the Project Executing Agency, shall have the overall responsibility for the implementation of the Project.
 

B. Project Steering Committee (PSC)

The DOH shall establish a PSC which shall provide policy advice and direction on the implementation plans in conjunction with the annual budget. The PSC shall include senior ofﬁcials of the DOH, senior representatives of National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), Department of Finance (DOF), Department of Budget and Management (DBM), and concerned NGOs. It shall also include a representative from the Coordinating Council of the Philippine Assistance Program (CCPAP) as an ex-ofﬁcio member.


C. Project Management Ofﬁce (PMO)

The PMO shall be established headed by a full- time Project Manager who shall be responsible for the day to day implementation of the Project.


D. Technical Coordination Committee (TCC)

The DOH shall establish a TCC which shall serve as a focal body to coordinate the activities of the various DOH Programs and Services involved in the Project.


E. Local Government Assistance and MonitoriNg Service (LGAMS) and Community Health Service (CHS)

The Central LGAMS shall coordinate technical and administrative support for the implementation of ICHSP at the Project Provinces. The PMO - Local Government Coordinator shall assist LGAMS in the aforementioned function. On behalf of the DOH, LGAMS shall execute a Project Implementation Agreement (PIA) with each Project Province, which shall serve as Annex to the Comprehensive Health Care Agreement. (CHCA) negotiated between DOH and such province.

The CHS shall coordinate technical and administrative tasks for component I which is Community Health Service Support and the sub-component on NGO-GO Partnership, and
the implementation of all three components in the Mindanao Provinces.


F. Implementation at Regional and Provincial Levels

Under the direction of LGAMS, CHS and the PMO, the Regional Field Offices (RFOs) of DOH shall be responsible for coordination of Project Implementation within their
respective regions, including coordination of ﬁnancial and other reporting systems at the regional level.

In each Project Province, the Governor shall serve as the Provincial Project Director to ensure provincial commitment to the Project. A Provincial Project Coordinator shall be appointed by the Governor. This coordinator will be responsible for day to day implementation of the Project in the relevant Project Province. The Provincial Project Coordinator shall be supported by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) which shall be responsible for the coordination of Project activities with the concerned LGUs, monitoring of Project implementation within the Project Province, and ﬁnancial and other reporting at the provincial level.

Attached are the organizational structures for the overall managerial and technical
direction of the project for immediate reference. 


This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA—REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

