Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>07/25/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 26-A s., 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines on the Utilisation of Schistosomiasis Control Service GOP Fund for the Conduct of National Consultative Conference Workshop on Planning for Schistosomiasis Control Program.</subject>

<body> 

There will be a National Consultative Conference Workshop on Planning for Schistosomiasis Control Program for field program managers and implementors from September 2—5, 1996 in Manila. Among the main areas of concern in this forthcoming 4—day live—in: Conference workshop are: 1) identification of issues that have affected program implementation, and come—up with recommendations to these issues; 2) discussion and preparation of schistosomiasis project plans based on an alternative strategies geared towards elimination and or eradication of the disease in some selected endemic areas; and 3) development of a revised action plans for this year (1996) and the incoming year (1997) relative to the modified control strategy on case finding and treatment (school children Grades I-VI) and the mass treatment program (barangays with 10% and above prevalence). 

A. Guidelines on the Conduct of Consultative Conference—Workshop:

1) The participants to this 4-day live—in Conference—Workshop shall be composed of the Chief of the Technical Division, the Regional and Provincial Schistosomiasis Coordinators of DOH Regional Field Office Nos.4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10,11, 12, ARMM and CARAGA, facilitators from Schistosomiasis Control Service. (SCS) and Schistosomiasis Research and Training Divisions and representatives from Internal Planning Service and Public Information and Health Education Service. Please refer to attached syllabus.

2. Resource Speakers may be invited from institutions such as the University of the Philippines (UP), Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP) and from other creditable training institutions.

3. Representatives from other government and non-government agencies involved in the control of schistosomiasis may also be invited to participate in this Conference-Workshop depending on the availability of funds.  

4. Staff coming from the Schistosomiasis Control Service (SCS)-DOH, Manila,Schistosomiasis Research and Training Division (SRTD) in Palo, Leyte shall constitute the facilitators for this Conference—workshop.

5. The Director/Officer-In-Charge of the Schistosomiasis Control Service shall designate the Training Coordinator with the assistance of the Training Committee members to take charge of the said Conference activities.

6. The Training Committee with the guidance of the Director Office—In—Charge of the Schistosomiasis Control Service shall do all the planning, scheduling and execution of the Conference—Workshop.


B. Guidelines on the Utilization of Funds for Consultative Conference-Workshop: 

1. The funds for the Conferonce—workshop shall cover expenses for food and lodging d o be contracted out), supplies and materials, honorarium for the invited Resource Speakers, conference hall, gasoline expenses, and the payment for the use of Audio— Visual equipment.

2. Computation of the estimated budget cost for the Schistosomiasis Conference workshop shall be based on the number of participants including facilitators and resource persons, times the number of workshop days, times Seven
Hundred Pesos (P700.00) (No. of Participants x 4 days x P700.00). Refer to the Conference breakdown cost found in the syllabus. 

3. The invited resource speakers from other agencies outside the DOH, shall receive an honorarium of Five Hundred Pesos (P500.00)/hour, the current rate for resource persons in the DOH.

4. The transportation expenses and per diems of one day before and one day after the four-day Conference—Workshop of those facilitators coming from the Schistosomiasis Research and Training Division (SRTD) in Palo, Leyte and from DOH Regional Field Office concern shall be financed by their respective sending agencies based on E.0. No. 248 dated May 29, 1995. Likewise, transportation expenses and per diems of one day before and one day after based on the above-mentioned E. 0. of representatives from other government and non-government agencies involved in schistosomiasis control who may be invited to participate in the consultative-workshop, shall also be financed by their respective agencies. 

5. Utilization of funds shall follow the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

6. The Training Coordinator with the assistance of the members of the Training Committee shall take charge of the training activities, and ensure that all necessary supporting documents are submitted on time to the Finance Service, Office of Management Service, Department of Health.

7. In the event that part/portion of the conference funds shall not be utilized after the Workshop the unused amount shall be programmed for schistosomiasis similar activity before the end of CY 1996. 

For strict compliance.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, M.D., M.P.H., CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


Schistosomiasis Control Service
