Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>06/18/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 21-A s. 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Development and Implementation of the DOH Womens Health and Safe Motherhood Project Maternal Care Delivery Civil Works Sub-Component</subject>

<body>

1.0 BACKGROUND

1.1 The DOH Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project (WHSMP) Maternal Care Delivery Component includes a civil works sub-component which will physically prepare “unreadable text” provincial and district hospitals, rural health units such as main health centers and barangay health stations, lying-in clinics and maternity waiting homes, to accommodate the unique special requirements of the WHSMP in pursuit of its objectives.

1.2 The Civil Works Sub-Component will upgrade the Obstetrics/gynecology departments or units of said hospitals, repair/renovate rural health units, and construct lying-in clinics and maternity waiting homes at selected provinces.

2.0 ORGANIZATION AND MACHINERY

2.1 The Civil Works Sub-Component shall have four major “unreadable text” of work. These are SITE AND FACILITIES “unreadable text”, PROJECT DEVELOPMENT (Preparation of Schematic “unreadable text” and Design Development Plans), PROJECT “unreadable text” (Preparation of Detailed Architecture and Engineering Plans and Other Contract Documents) and PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION including Bidding and Awarding of “unreadable text” and Construction.

2.2 The Provincial Management Office (PMO) of the WHSMP shall “unreadable text” overall responsibility for management, construction and technical performance of this particular WHSMP component and sub-component with technical assistance from the Health Infrastructure Service (INFRA), DOH.

2.3 The Civil Works Sub-Component falls under the Component Management of Maternal Care Delivery which shall be responsible for developing project guidelines and for providing technical supervision over component deliverables.

2.4 The engineering units of the Regional Health Offices (RHO), being the regional technical arm of the INFRA as far as health infrastructure projects is concerned, shall also render technical assistance to the WHSMP by ensuring the proper implementation of the project guidelines in their areas of jurisdiction. 

2.5 The four major phases of work will be accomplished with the aid of a private consulting firm collaboration - Philippine Center for Population, and Development and DCCO Engineering Corporation, hereafter referred to as the Consultant.

2.6 The Local Government Units (LGU) through a Memorandum of Agreement with the DOH, shall support the conduct of the major phases of work by providing the access to data, the human resource counterpart, etc., for facilities investigation, project development and project implementation.

3.0 GUIDELINES FOR THE FOUR MAJOR PHASES OF WORK

3.1 SITE AND FACILITIES INVESTIGATION

3.1.1 This phase of work will include investigation of existing hospital and rural health unit sites and structures to determine, among others, their architectural and structural integrity, the state of usefulness and availability of utility systems, and the prevailing environmental conditions.

3.1.2 The Consultant shall conduct the above work for all involved hospitals, rural health units, lying-in clinics and maternity waiting homes.

3.1.3 The Consultant shall submit a Final Report for this phase of work on a per province basis.

3.1.4 The Regional Health Office engineering units shall assist the Consultant by conducting the introductory meetings of the Consultant with the Offices of Governors, Mayors, and Chiefs of Hospitals prior to the start of this phase of work.

3.1.5 The Regional Health Office engineering units shall also provide the appropriate assistance to the Consultant in the gathering of data and in their continuing visits to the involved sites and structures.

3.1.6 The INFRA shall assist the PMO in monitoring the work of the Consultant during the conduct of this phase of work.

3.2 PROJECT DEVELOPMENT

3.2.1 This phase of work will include the preparation and approval of schematic plans for the repair/renovation/upgrading of hospitals/rural health units and for the construction of lying-in clinics and maternity waiting homes.

3.2.2 The Consultant shall perform the above work for all projects under the WHSMP civil works sub-component with technical advise from the INFRA.

3.2.3 The Consultant shall submit a Report consolidating the approved schematic plans on a per province basis.

3.2.4 The INFRA shall assist the PMO in the review, evaluation and final approval of the schematic plans.

3.2.5 As a rule, the schematic plans will be approved by the end-user (Chief of Hospital for hospitals and the Municipal Health Officer for the rest of the rural health units), the Program Manager (WHSMP), upon recommendation of the INFRA, and the Project Director (WHSMP), in that order.

3.3 PROJECT DOCUMENTATION

3.3.1 This phase of work will include the preparation and approval of the necessary contract documents needed for bidding and awarding of the projects for construction such as the Detailed Architecture and Engineering Plans, Technical Specifications and Detailed Estimates. 

3.3.2 The Consultant shall prepare the said contract documents for all civil works projects under the WHSMP.

3.3.3 The INFRA shall assist the PMO in the review, evaluation and final approval of the contract documents.

3.3.4 As a rule, the contract documents will be approved following the order set forth in item 3.2.5 above.

3.4 PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

3.4.1 This phase of work will include public bidding, awarding of contracts, construction period and final project acceptance and turnover.

3.4.2 The public bidding of projects and awarding of contracts will be conducted following the provisions of PD 1594 (Rules and Regulations for the Implementation of Government Infrastructure Projects), as amended, and AO 17 s. 1993 of the DOH.

3.4.3 The public bidding of projects will be done on the Regional Health Office level in order to tap the services and resources of the local private sector as much as possible.

3.4.4 As a general rule, contracts will be awarded on the Regional Health Office level and approved by the Regional Health Director, Program Manager, (WHSMP), upon recommendation of the INFRA, and Project Director (WHSMP), in that order.

3.4.5 The regular supervision of construction of projects will be done by the engineering units of the Offices of the Governor and Mayor concerned as provided for in the Memorandum of Agreement between the DOH and Local Government Units.

3.4.6 As a general rule, the standard procedures to be followed for and during construction, from contract information, problem solving, to contractor’s performance evaluation, shall be based on the provisions set forth in PD 1594, as amended.

3.4.7 The Regional Health Office engineering units shall regularly monitor the construction work activities in their areas of jurisdiction. They shall prepare monthly status reports for submission to the WHSMP, copy furnished the INFRA.

3.4.8 As a general rule, the completed projects will be accepted by the end-user, Regional Health Director, Program Manager (WHSMP), upon recommendation of the INFRA, and Project Director (WHSMP), in that order.

3.4.9 The completed projects will be turned over to the Local Government Units by the Regional Health Directors, representing the WHSMP and the DOH. 

This Administrative Order takes effect immediately. 

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA N. REODICA, M.D., M.P.H., CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

/whsmp-ao.imp/gez50/infra
