Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>02/09/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2-C s. 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 1996 HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH</subject>

<body>
 

1.0 BACKGROUND


1.1 The Medium Term Development Plan (MTDP) (1993 - 1998) for Health Infrastructure Projects of the Department of Health has the following target objectives:

a. Conformance of hospitals and health facilities to meet standard and developmental requirements for physical plant design and planning;

b. Provision of complete facilities to support utility, safety and environmental requirements;

c. Prioritizing the upgrading of Frontline Medical Service Facilities;

d. Institutionalizing Preventive and Corrective Maintenance System for Hospital Physical Plant; and 

e. Meeting the needs of the increase in hospital bed capacity as provided by law.


1.2 To fulfil the above objectives, the DOH has been continuously implementing, since 1993, various kinds of infrastructure projects for its retained hospitals, health facilities and offices. These projects include need construction, repair/renovation, completion and rehabilitation/retrofitting works.

1.3 For 1996, the total amount of the infrastructure funds of the DOH is approximately 750 million pesos.



2.0 PROGRAM ORGANISATION AND MACHINERY


2.1 The 1996 DOH Infrastructure Project shall have three major phases of work. These are Project Preliminaries, Project Development and Project Implementation.


2.2 The Health Infrastructure Service (INFRA) of the DOH, under the Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulations (OHFSR), shall maintain the overall management of the three major phases of work of the Project;


2.3 As in the previous years, the Regional Health Offices (RHO) will provide the INFRA with the technical staff counterpart of the RHOs, Regional Hospitals and Medical Centers;

2.4 Likewise, the NCR Special/Specialty Hospitals and Medical Centers will provide the INFRA with the same assistance in the management of their infrastructure projects.



3.0 GUIDELINES FOR IMPLEMENTATION


3.1 PROJECT PRELIMINARIES

For the project preliminaries, the following activities shall be conducted:

3.1.1 Validation of Projects

a. The INFRA shall re-discuss the list of 1996 projects with individual hospitals and offices for final approval. The project listing was based on the said MTDP for Health Infrastructure Projects of the DOH and was referred to by the INFRA for the 1996 non-infra capital outlay of the DOH;

b. A master list of final projects and their description shall be prepared by the INFRA;

3.1.2 Preparation of Request for Release of Allotment

a. Each hospital and office must be responsible for the preparation of their individual request to the DBM for the release of allotment of their non-infra capital;

b. The request shall be supported by a Project Program of Works which shall be prepared by the INFRA and approved by the Undersecretary, OHFSR, by authority of the Secretary of Health;

3.1.3 Hiring of Private Consultants

a. Because of the extensive scope of work and budget allocated for infrastructure projects of hospitals, it is prescribed that private consultants (Architecture and Engineering Consultants) shall be hired by the DOH to prepare the necessary Detailed Architecture and Engineering Plans (A and E plans) and other Contract Documents for project development phase of work;

b. Likewise, it is prescribed that these same consultants will be hired to conduct construction supervision during project implementation phase of work;

c. The Consultants will be hired following the NEDA Guidelines on Hiring Consultants for Government Infrastructure Projects, as amended;

d. The INFRA shall take charge of the technical and secretariat aspects of work involved in the hiring of consultants as assistance to the PEAC (Prequalification, Evaluation and Awards Committee for Consultancy for Infrastructure Projects),the central committee of the DOH tasked with the hiring of consultants;

e. The INFRA will monitor the works of consultants, initiate meetings between consultants and end-users, and perform other coordination works.

f. For hospitals with projects that have already complete documents for project development, the hiring of consultants for the preparation of Detailed A and E plans may be deferred. However, consultants will still be procured for project implementation (construction supervision).

g. For offices with the in-house capability to prepare A and E plans and to supervise construction, such as the Central Office and Regional Health Offices, the hiring of consultants will be deleted.


3.2 PROJECT DEVELOPMENT

For the project development phase, the roles and functions of the INFRA, end-user, and consultant are explained below:

3.2.1 Preparation of Schematic Plans

a. The INFRA shall prepare the project schematic plans in coordination with the hospital or project end-user;

b. The schematic plans shall be based on the approved master development plan of the hospital as prepared also by the INFRA;

c. The hospital or project end-user shall provide the INFRA with all information regarding the project, including space requirements, equipment specifications, etc,;

d. The INFRA shall submit the project schematic plans to the hospital for comments and/or design concurrence of the Chief of Hospital

e. The INFRA shall then indorse the schematic plans to the Undersecretary, OHFSR, for final approval, by authority of the Secretary of Health;

3.2.2 Preparation of Detailed Architecture and Engineering Plans

a. The INFRA shall turn over to the consultant the approved schematic plans for the preparation of the Detailed A and E Plans, and other Contract Documents, such as Technical Specifications, Detailed Estimates and Bid Documents;

3.2.3 Exemptions

a. As addition to item 3.1.3.f, previously prepared A and E plans and other contract documents still have to be submitted by the concerned hospital to INFRA for updating, review and OHFSR final approval


3.3 PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

For the project implementation phase, the roles and functions of the INFRA, hospital or end-user, RHO, and consultant are described below;

3.3.1 Bidding and Awarding of Project Contracts

a. The bidding of projects and awarding of project contracts will be conducted following PD 1594 Implementing Rules and Regulations for Implementation of Government Infrastructure Projects as amended;

b. The bidding and awarding of projects shall also be conducted following the provision in AO 17 s. 1993 of the DOH;

3.3.2 Construction Period

a. The consultant shall be responsible for construction supervision of the project until completion and turnover;

b. The INFRA, with their counterparts in the RHO’s and hospitals, shall regularly monitor the construction works and all other related activities including the work of the consultant;

c. The INFRA, with their counterparts in the RHOs and hospitals shall prepare the monthly and quarterly accomplishment reports of project implementation;

3.3.3 Completion and Final Acceptance

a. The INFRA shall be responsible for recommending the final acceptance for projects of NCR Special/Specialty Hospitals and Medical Centers, and for projects of the Central Office;

b. The RHOs shall be responsible for recommending the final acceptance for projects of hospitals and offices within their respective jurisdiction.



</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO JR., M.D., M.H.A.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>