Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>05/09/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 8 S. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in the utilization of the 1997 Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF-2) as per Executive Order No. 407.</subject>

<body>

I. PURPOSE AND RATIONALE:

The 1997 General Appropriations Act provided for a second Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAP-2) to augment the PAF-1. it aims to fulfill the target communities unmet minimum basic needs. As in Poverty Alleviation Fund — 1, it focuses on 5th and 6th class municipalities. It also gives emphasis to the underprivileged basic sectors and cross-sectoral disadvantaged groups. PAF - 2 allows for the municipality to hand-pick from a menu of project prototypes their most-felt needs. 

The Department of Health, through the Family Health and Nutrition Welfare Program, intends to institutionalize the efforts under PAF-1 and ensure sustainability of activities and initiatives. It seeks to intensify preventive health care among the targeted sectors, the delivery of unmet MBNs and Basic Reform Commitments (BRC), and will support capability-building within the community, in general. Promotion of indigenous/ traditional health care will also be emphasized under this program along with the provision of innovative health care services. 


II. OPERATING FRAMEWORK:

The operations and implementation of PAF- 2 shall be based on the unmet MBN and BRCs of the municipality and the National Action Agenda on Anti-Poverty. Proclamations 547 and 548 Administrative Orders 194 and 291 shall be the budgetary  guidelines stipulated in the IRR on the Management of the 1997 PAP and the DOH’s specific budgetary guidelines stipulated herein.

In municipalities where the MBN has not been implemented, the Local Health Boards shall identify the health needs of their respective municipality through area-based health planning processes.


III. PROJECT POLICY:

The projects to be funded shall fall under two major categories namely: 

1. Minimum Basic Needs of the Disadvantaged Sectors / Convergence Areas - these are the unmet fundamental needs of the basic sectors and the cross-sectoral disadvantaged groups.

Basic Reform Commitment to health “unreadable text”

(1) Access to primary health care facilities within 6 kilometers of population clusters/puroks; 

(2) Access to secondary hospitals or ambulance services within 40 km in every municipality; 

(3) Self-sustaining community health financing schemes developed in one municipality per province; 

(4) Access to services of government/private clinics for personal health care; 

(5) Availability of government health personnel capable of providing adequate management of common preventable diseases like pneumonia and diarrhea;

(6) One traditional healer trained for every 2 barangays;

(7) Availability of one month stock level of essential drugs in devolved health facilities;

(8) Availability of adequate dental supplies (sealant, sodium fluoride, permanent sealing materials) in government health facilities;

(9) Availability of at least one trained BHW for every 20 to 30 households; 

(10) TB symptomatics examined and TB—positive cases treated;

(11) School children dewormed;

(12) Functional Botika ng Barangay/Binhi accessible to the majority of the community at least 5 km from nearest drugstores;

(13) Common herbal garden / botika sa paso / barangay hall; 

(14) Propagation / utilization of tsaang gubat as preventive measure against dental caries; 

(15) Family with access to potable water (faucet / deep well) within 250 meters or 10-minute walk;

(16) Family with sanitary toilet (water sealed, antipolo flush type);

(17) Second and third degree malnourished children rehabilitated;

(18) Children and Women provided with Micronutrient supplements (VAC IOC, Iron);

“unreadable text”


IV. PROJECT PROTOTYPES:

Under the two major categories stated above PAF-2 shall fund the following projects as well as other projects derived from the above two major categories:

1. Minimum Basic Needs of the Disadvantaged Sectors:

1.1 Nutrition (for infants 6-24 mos)— which may include provision of food supplements using indigenous / local processed foods to underweight infants aged 6-24 mos. old and Iron drops to LBW and diagnosed anemic infants 6-11 mos. old

1.2 Care for the Elderly — which may include provision of primary health services for the elderly. Training of nurses on fundamental geriatric care in a community setting may also be considered as well as distribution of IEC materials and access to medicines for common illnesses.

1.3 Blindness and Deafness Prevention and Control - which may include training on early screening for deafness and blindness/ low vision and access to appropriate diagnosis and treatment. This also includes cataract surgery. The municipal government may identify strategically located clinics or hospitals whether government or private to provide clinical diagnostic and therapeutic services. 

1.4 Occupational Health - which may include capability-building training of farmers and other agricultural workers, and health personnel for identification and management of pesticide poisoning cases. 

1.5 Schistosomiasis Control Component Project - which may include education and trainings of health personnel and delivery of primary care services to farmers and other agricultural workers.

1.6 Malaria - which may provide treated mosquito nets to at least 60% of farmers and /or other less-privileged / disadvantaged sectors .

1.7 Community—Based Rehabilitation and Disability Prevention - which may include registration of persons with disabilitY; training on physical, occupational, speech, & biopsychosocial therapy; provision of assistive devices, basic rehabilitation tools and equipments.

2. Health Basic Reform Commitment

2.1 Projects derived from the list of health BRCs (nos. 1-19)

2. 2 Maternal and Child Health which may include the following activities:

2.1.1 BHW/Hilot trainings for delivery of services especially to Tribal Communities 
2.1.2 Training of midwives for the delivery of services
2.3 Dental Health - which may focus on preventive care on women and children through Tsaang—gubat propagation and use of Tsaang-gubat decoction. 

2.4- DHW - which may include registry of BHWs and provision of training on primary delivery of health services and microfinancing. 

2.5 Traditional Medicine — which may include the establishment of an acupressure/acupuncture clinical service and training unit in the municipality; production and marketing of traditional medicines in the form of locally-made tablets, syrups and ointments; contract farming of medicinal plants in municipalities within the vicinity of herbal processing plants; and attendance to traditional health care training programs (nationwide).

2.6 Botika ng Barangay - which may include the establishment of a community-owned drug outlet in at least 4 priority barangays with a distance of 5 kms from the nearest drugstore. The project shall also provide TEVs to a government pharmacist from the nearest government hospitals or a private sector pharmacist for direct supervision. 

2.7 STD / AIDS - which may include training of counselors and intensive education campaign on STD/AIDS to encourage behavior change and advocate for responsible sexual behaviors. 

2.8 Mental Health - which may focus on capability building of MHOS on the identification and management of common psychosocial problems such as but not limited to domestic violence.

3. The municipality shall identify at least 1 project from the BRC and one from the MBN. Thus, each municipality shall have at least 2 projects for the period of implementation. 

4. LGU’s counterpart shall be negotiated and decided upon with the DOH Representative through the Local Health Board.

5. The project shall not go beyond a one year time frame.

6. LGUs shall not use this fund to pay any salaries, wages and benefits.


V. FUND ACCESS PROCESS

In order to access the fund, the following steps shall be carried out:

1. The projects shall be identified by the municipal government through its Local Health Board from a menu of project prototypes (Item IV and/or Annex A) under the technical assistance of the PHO and support from the “missing text” shall be “missing text” in a joint meeting of the municipal “missing text” and the municipal TWG.

2. All municipalities shall submit their work and financial plans, copies of Forms 5 and 6 together with their procurement plans, duly signed by the Mayors and MHOs, for their respective LHBs to the PHO on or before , May 15, 1997, who shall, in turn, consolidate all the municipal plans and submit it to the Provincial Health Board for concurrence.

3. The Provincial Health Board shall then review the consolidated municipal work and financial plans and procurement plans ensuring that they are not in conflict with the Provincial Area—Based Health Plan (ABHP). Upon concurrence of the Provincial Local Health Board, it shall be forwarded to the DOH-RFO, duly signed by the Governor and PHO for the PLHB.

4. The DOH Regional Field Office shall review all submitted Provincial plans, ensuring that the plans are in accordance with Form 1. 

5. The Regional Field Office shall then consolidate all Provincial Plans into Form 3 and submit it to the Central Office not later than June 15, 1997.

6. Regional Field Office shall devise and approve an allocation plan and submit it to the Provincial Health Office. Such allocation plan shall segregate the specific supplies and medicines to be bought by the Region and the municipal allocation for locally-procured supplies/medicines and project support.

7. The Central Office shall review and endorse these (Form 3) to the DBM, not later than June 30, 1997, for release of the NCA. 

8. Upon release of the NCA, the Regional Health Office shall forge a Memorandum of Agreement with the concerned LGU and, subsequently, release the municipal allocations as fund transfer/ cash advance to the Municipal Health Development Fund in accordance with Sec. 2 (K) and Sec. 25 of the Local Government Code. 

9. ARMM shall follow the above process (Steps 1-7). However, the Central Office shall enter into a MOA with the Office of the Regional Governor before the release of their funds. 

10.The municipalities and PHO shall designate observers to the Regional Committee on Bidding and Awards who should be present during bulk bidding of supplies, drugs and medicines for PAF-2.

11. The DOH—Regional Field Office shall ensure that all projects shall be implemented in accordance with the set standards of the national principal agencies.


VI. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION:

The identified projects shall be supervised by the head of the Municipal Health Office. Bulk purchase of medicines/vaccines/equipments shall be handled by the DOH Regional Office except for purchases of emergency medicines, supplies and drugs.

Trainings of health personnel and Barangay Health Workers shall be in close coordination with the different concerned program managers at the DOH Regional Office. The Regional Field Office Training Officer shall ensure appropriate synchronization of the training activities and shall submit to the Provincial LHB the  calendar of training activities for dissemination to the municipal LHB.

Coordination with other government agencies, in particular the Department of  Education, Culture and Sports (DECS), Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG), Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), and with the Peoples’ Organizations (PO) and Non Government Organizations (NGO) shall be assumed by the LGUs concerned. Activities that may require direct partnership with private business sector like private hospitals and pharmacies shall be formalized with a Memorandum of Agreement.

Monitoring of projects shall be the responsibility of the DOH Regional Field Office (DIRFO) in close coordination with the PLHB and SRA-PTWG. The DIRFO shall submit to the DOH Central Office their monitoring schedules and monitoring reports not later than one month after its execution.

The DOH-RFO shall provide the DOH Central Office with Accomplishment Reports quarterly on the status of implementation and fund utilization of PAF-2.


VII. FUND UTILIZATION:

LGU Counterpart shall not be less than 10 % of the municipal allocation. Identification of the Specific counterpart shall be identified and negotiated with the Local Health Board DOH Representative.

A separate book of accounts for DOH PAF-2 shall be maintained by the DOH Regional Field Office. All disbursements of funds shall be subjected to and governed by the usual budgetary and accounting and auditing rules and regulations.


VIII. ADMINISTRATIVE FUND:

The 3% PAF-2 Administrative Fund shall be utilized mainly to cover the cost of Regional and Provincial mobilization/monitoring and as such, 70% shall be equitably distributed among the Regional offices. 15% of the Regional allocation shall be made available by the regional offices for the mobilization of the provincial government and basic sector. Should these funds be inadequate, existing administrative funds from their Health Development Fund and the regular budget may
be tapped. The remaining 30% of the PAF-2 Administrative Fund shall be used by the Central Office to cover activities such as networking and social mobilization.

For strict compliance.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>