   
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>12/17/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 31-B s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES FOR THE RELEASE AND UTILIZATION OF FUND OF THE INTEGRATED COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES PROJECT (ICHSP) UNDER THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT EMPOWERMENT FUND (LGEF)</subject>

<body>

Pursuant to the Joint Circular No. 2-96 dated 29 November, 1996 of the Department of  Budget and Management and the National Economic and Development Authority providing guidelines for the release and utilization of funds under the LGEF, this Administrative Order is issued to prescribe standard operating procedures for the releases, utilization and reporting of iCHSP fund ﬁ'om the Department of Health (DOH) to the Project provinces, as well as from the Project provinces to the recipient municipalities. 


1.0 General Guidelines

1.1. All fund releases to the Project provinces shall be treated as financial assistance from the DOH over and above the mandated IRA share. These shall be used to implement devolved activities supportive of the major national health programs and projects, including local health activities, in the 20 provinces under the of the Social Reform Agenda and/or in the fifth (5th) and sixth (6th), including those in the Special Zone for Peace and Development.(ZOPAD). 

1.2. The ICHSP funds released to the Department of Health shall be subject to the existing budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations particularly the, applicable provisions of the Joint Circular Nos. 5—82 and 2-94 of the  Commission on Audit (COA), Department of Finance (DOF). and Department of Budget and Management(DBM), as amended, the Modiﬁed Disbursement System(MDS) set-up through the Memorandum Order No. 276 and the  simplified Fund Release System (SFRS) established through National Budget Circular No. 440. 

1.3. The funds for the implementation of projects by the Project provinces shall be transferred by the DOH to such Project provinces as a cash advance/ trust liability subject to liquidation.

1.4. All fund releases to the Project provinces by the DOH shall be subject to a perfected Project Implementation Agreement (PIA) between the DOH and the pretence concerned. In the case of the recipient municipalities, a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) shall be required between the Project provinces and the municipalities concerned.

1.5 The Project Provinces and the recipient municipalities shall provide the counterpart funds specified in the signed Agreement sourced out from local resources including the Internal Revenue Allotment. 


2.0 Requirement For the Initial Release/Transfer of Funds

2.1 The following shall be required for the Initial release /transfer of ICHSP funds:

a. Signed Project Implementation Agreement (PIA) between the Department of Health and the Project province, in the case of fund release/transfer from the DOH to the province. However, in the case of transfer/release to the recipient municipalities, a signed Memorandum of Agreement between the province and the municipality concerned; such Agreement shall provide commitment of the Project provinces and the recipient municipalities to provide the recurrent costs of the Project after the ICHSP project-period.

b. Administrative arrangements for fund management or financial management office protocols, deﬁned financial accountabilities and responsibilities of identified ICHSP personnel and /or provincial/municipal personnel in accordance with the Asian Development Bank Guidelines of Procurement of Goods and Services duly approved by the Department of Health;

Counterpart fund whether in cash or in kind specified in the signed agreement to include requirements for recurrent costs and other LGU funded activities explicitly indicated as ICHSP appropriation in the approved provincial and municipal annual budgets.

d. Approved work and financial providing implementation activities and fund support, including output indicators against which LGU performance shall be measured;

e. An ICHSP Trust Account opened by the Project Provinces for releases by DOH to the province. Likewise, an ICHSP Trust Account opened by the municipality for releases (in case) by the province to the municipality. All trust accounts must be opened in an authorized government depository bank; 

2.2 Subsequent releases of ICHSP funds shall be in the form of replenishments.

2.2.1 The following requirements shall be submitted to support request for subsequent releases: 

a. Financial Report of Operations duly certified by the Chief Accountant ' of the Provincial Health Office/Provincial Government Office in accordance with the prescribed format shown as Appendix 1;
b. Physical Report of Operations duly approved by the Provincial Health Officer/Provincial Governor in accordance with the prescribed format as shown as Appendix 2;

2.2.2 Financial Report of Operations shall be based on actual disbursements and must be supported with checks issued (xerox copy), official receipts and other pertinent documents necessary to support the validity of such report.

2.2.3 Physical Report of Operations shall be based on actual accomplishments and Work Targets which are attainable and realistic.


3.0 Procedural Guidelines

3.1 Release of Funds

3.1.1 The initial release of funds shall be approved by the ICHSP Project Director upon recommendation of ICHSP Project Coordinator after review of compliance with the requirements enumerated in Section 2.0 hereof by the Project Provinces.

3.1.2 The initial and subsequent fund releases/transfers in the form of cash advances shall be in an amount sufficient for three (3) months operations corresponding to the expenditures for salaries of PIU personnel and the maintenance and operations of the PIU, and other eligible expenditures subject to the approval of the releasing agency based on the approved Work and Financial Plan.

3.1.3 The check in the amount of the allocated fund release shall be issued in the name of the local government concerned for deposit to the ICHSP trust account. The local government concerned shall issue an official receipt to acknowledge receipt of the check.

3.1.4 The request for fund outside the approved work and Financial Plan shall be approved by the ICHSP Project Director or Project Coordinator upon submission of justification for the purpose.

3.2 Utilization of Funds

3.2.1 The ICHSP funds released to the local government concerned shall be used only for the eligible expenditures of activities identified in the work and financial plan and the guidelines for utilization accompanying each fund release/transfer.

3.2.2 Utilization of ICHSP funds transferred to PIU should follow the ADB financing percentages enumerated in Schedule 3 of the Loan Agreement as shown in Appendix 3. ADB financing percentage is the portion that shall be charged to the Loan Proceeds of the funds allotted for each category of expenditures. The balance thereof shall be charged to GOP/Peso Counterpart funds.

3.3 Liquidation/Replenishment of Fund Releases

3.3.1 Replenishment of the cash advances may be done every month with the submission of the replenishment report constituting of documents supporting disbursements in accordance with the usual government accounting and auditing rules and regulations, and the required financial reports prescribed in the pertinent issuances.

3.3.2 The subsequent monthly releases of allocated fund shall only be made when the local government unit submits replenishment report. No releases shall be effected if report of liquidation or replenishment is submitted not in accordance with accounting rules and regulations. 

3.3.3 Any utilized fund from each item of expenditures can be utilized ,for other line items subject however to the approval by the Secretary of Health and upon recommendation by the ICHSP Project Director of the Request for Realignment from the PIUs.

3.4 Reporting Requirements and Accountability 

3.4.1 The accounting or recording of transactions should follow the guidelines prescribed in the Joint Circular of the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), Commission on Audit (COA) and the Department of Finance(DOF).

3.4.2 The LGU/PIU shall submit monthly and quarterly reports required under  these guidelines. The monthly liquidation report in each quarter shall be the basis of subsequent releases to the LGU. The Quarterly Financial Operations Report shall be the basis for the subsequent quarterly release;

3.4.3 The monthly replenishment report shall be submitted on or before the 110th day of the month immediately following the subject month. The Quarterly Financial Operations Report shall be submitted on or before the 10th day of  the month immediately following the first quarter month.;

3.4.4 The PIU shall ensure that all the required reports are submitted to the DOH- PMO. The Chief Accountant of the Provincial Health Office or the Provincial Government shall certify to the validity of such reports.


4.0 Periodic Review and Evaluation

4.1. The PMO with assistance of the DOH-Finance Service shall conduct periodic on-the-spot review and evaluation of the disbursements in the Project Provinces.


5.0 Effectivity 

These guidelines shall take effect immediately and remain applicable until such time that the project fund is no longer available and or the Project is terminated. Any guidelines inconsistent with the provisions of this issuance shall not be applied.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>