Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>04/01/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 6 s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: SALE OF OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS BY BUREAU OF FOOD AND DRUGS (BFAD)</subject>

<body>

Section 10 of RA 8250 - General Appropriation Act, FY 1997, authorized all government departments, bureaus, offices or agencies to sell their official publications.

Anent thereto, hereunder are the types of official publications issued by the Bureau:

1. Laws related to operation of Bureau of Food and Drugs
2. Implementing Rules and Regulations of Bureau of Food and Drugs.
3. Bureau Circulars, Memorandum and Other Related Issues
4. Bureau of Food and Drugs Guidelines and Procedures 
5. Other BFAD Related Documents 

The aforementioned documents shall be offered for sale to the general public at One Peso (P1.00) per page.

Furthermore, the proceed derived therefrom shall be deposited to the General Fund and may be made available to defray the cost of printing of such official publications subject to Special Budget pursuant to Section 35, Book VI of E.O. No. 292.

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>MILAGROS L. FERNANDEZ, MD. MPH.</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>


1428 GENERAL APPROPRIATIONS ACT, IT 1997

regulations: PROVIDED, That any interest accruing on deposit accounts and any forfeited accounts shall be recorded as Increase of the General Fund and shall be remitted to the National Treasury at the end of each quarter. This provision shall apply to bonds posted in cash, such as bidder’s bond, guaranty bonds, bell bonds, judicial deposits for the benefit of clients, cash under litigation deposited in court or quasi-Judicial bodies and other refundable ad judicial bonds, and all bonds and deposits required by law, rules and regulations to be posted to ensure the faithful performance of an activity or undertaking.

Sec. 8. Seminar and Conference Fees. Departments, bureaus, offices or agencies which conduct training progress in relation to their mandated functions are authorized to collect seminar and conference room fees form government and private agency participants, at such standard rates as the Department of Budget and Management and the Civil Service Commission shall deem appropriate. The proceeds derived from such seminars or conference may be made available for the conduct of such seminars and conferences, subject to pertinent budget, accounting and auditing rules and regulations; PROVIDED, That any excess therefrom shall be remitted to the National Treasury and shall accrue to the General Fund; PROVIDED, FURTHER, That upon the conclusion of the seminar or conference, the office authorized to conduct the scan shall submit to the Department of Budget and Management a report of the income realised and of the expenses incurred; PROVIDED, FINALLY, That no appropriation authorized in this Act shall be used to support or augment expenses for seminars or conferences.

Sec. 9. Sale of Products. Departments, bureaus, offices or agencies are hereby authorized to sell products of agricultural, industrial or other projects. The proceeds derived therefore shall be deposited with the National Treasury and shall accrue to the General Fund, pursuant to Section 44 of Book BI, E.O. No. 292, unless otherwise provided by law or by Special Provision in this Act. 

Sec. 10. Sale of Official Publications. Departments, bureaus, offices or agencies are hereby authorized to sell their official publications. The proceeds derived therefore shall be deposited with the National Treasury and shall accrue to the General Fund. Such proceeds may be made available to defray the cost of printing of such official publications subject to Special Budget pursuant to Section 35, Book VI of E.O. No. 292.

Sec. 11. Sale of Non-Serviceable, Obsolete and other Unnecessary Equipment. Departments, bureaus, offices or agencies are hereby authorized to sell non-serviceable, obsolete and other necessary equipment including cards, vans the like pursuant to the provisions of section 79 of P.D. No. 1445 and E.O. No. 309 dated March 8, 1996. The proceeds from the sale of equipment of the agency shall be deemed automatically appropriated for the purchase of new ones, and for the repair or rehabilitation of existing vital equipment; PROVIDED, That the purchase of such new cars and vans shall be subject to pertinent laws, rules and regulations.

Sec. 12. Donation. Departments, bureaus, offices or agencies may accept donations, contribution, grants, bequests or gifts, in cash or in kind, from various sources, domestic or foreign, for purposes relevant to their function; PROVIDED, That in cases of donations from foreign governments, acceptance thereof shall be subject to the prior clearance and approval of the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Secretary of Foreign Affairs. Receipts from donations shall be accounted for in the books of the government in accordance with pertinent accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Such donations, whether in cash or in kind, shall be deemed automatically appropriated for purposes specified by the donor. The receipts from cash donations and sale of donated commodities shall be remitted to the National Treasury and recorded as a Special Account in the General Fund and shall be available through a Special Budget pursuant to the Section 35, Book VI of E.O. No. 297. The agency concerned shall submit to the Department of Budget and Management and to the Commission on Audit a quarterly report of all donations whether in cash or in kind as well as the expenditures and disbursements of the amounts released. 

In case of violation of this Section, the erring officials and employees shall be subject to disciplinary action under the provision of Section 45 and 80 of Book VI, E.O. No. 292 and to appropriate criminal action under existing penal laws.

Sec. 13. National Internal Revenue Taxes, and Import Duties of National and Local Government Agencies as well as Government-Owned And/Or Controlled Corporations, including Armed Forces of the Philippine Commissary Exchange Service (AFPCLS) and Philippine National Police Storage Store System (PNPSSS). National internal revenue taxes and import duties payable by national government agencies to the National Government as well as customs duties and taxes for importation of equipment by local government units, except those duties and taxes imposed on equipment imported and donated by private entities, are deemed automatically appropriated. Tax expenditure subsidy to various government-owned and/or controlled corporations, including AFPCLS, thru the Department of National Defense, and PNPSSS thru the Department of Interior and Local Government, shall likewise be deemed automatically appropriated, subject to approval by the Fiscal Incentives Review Board (FIRB) pursuant to Executive Order No. 95, as amended, the amounts pertaining to such taxes and duties shall be considered as revenue and expenditure of the government. 

The implementation of this Section shall be in accordance with guidelines jointly issued by the Department of Budget and Management and the Department of Finance.

Sec. 14. Loan Agreements. Departments, bureaus, offices or agencies, including government-owned and/or controlled corporations, shall in no case enter into foreign or domestic loan agreements, whether in cash or in kind, except upon occurrence of the Secretary of Budget and Management with respect to peso requirements and implications on expenditure ceilings and prior approval of the President of 