Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>11/06/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 27 s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: POLICIES AND GUIDELINES ON THE ADOPTION OF GLIDING FLEXIBLE WORK SCHEDULE</subject>

<body>

Consistent with the Department’s program thrust for the welfare and development, as well as the enhancement of the productivity of its human resources, the following policy and guidelines on the adoption of gliding ﬂexible working hours in the DOH are hereby prescribed: 


I. BASES 

1. Sec. 6, Rule XVII of the Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of E.O. 292 which provides that flexible working hours may be allowed subject to the discretion of the head of department or agency, however, in no case shall the weekly hours be reduced in the event the department or agency adopts the  flexitime schedule in reporting for work.

2. Civil Service Commission Memorandum Circular No. 5, s. 1997. “Policy on Attendance and Punctuality “ which authorizes all Heads of Departments, Agencies, Bureaus and Offices of the National Government and Government- Owned and Controlled Corporations with Original Charters and State Colleges and Universities, to promulgate their own internal rules and regulations on attendance and punctuality which will require their employees to incur less absences, tardiness/undertime.

3. Memorandum Circular No. 111, dated 17 January 1995 issued by the Office of the President, which directs all heads of departments, agencies and other government instrumentalities, including government-owned and controlled corporations and local government units engaged in the delivery of critical frontline services and public transactions to ensure smooth ﬂow of transactions in government and prompt response to public request by operationalizing a six-day work week from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., continuously without break.


II. POLICY

The Department adopts a gliding flexible work schedule provided that:

1. An employee must render at least eight (8) hours of work each day from Monday to Friday for a total of forty (40) hours per week.
2. The public must be assured of prompt continuous and efficient delivery of  service from 8:00 in the morning to 5:00 in the afternoon.
3. Off—setting of tardiness and/or undertime by working for an equivalent number of minutes or hours tardy or undertime, shall not be allowed.


III. COVERAGE

The implementation of this system shall cover all employees in the DOH Central Office, Regional Health Offices, Hospitals, and Attached Agencies. 

Not Covered by this system are as follows:

1. Those personnel who are working on shifts such as physicians, nurses, other hospital workers and security guards.
2. Drivers who are assigned to provide service to specific DOH Officials.
3. Selected personnel from the Bureau of Licensing and Regulations (BLR), Bureau of Research and Laboratories (BRL), and Radiation Health Service (RHS) whose fixed work schedule is from 10:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

Heads of Offices of the said personnel are required to submit to the Personnel Division, Administrative Service official list of these concerned employees and their respective schedules for proper monitoring within five (5) days after the effectivity of this Order.


1V. OBJECTIVES 

The adoption of gliding flexitime aims to:

1. increase organizational productivity;
2. improve employees’ job satisfaction and consequently, their performance;
3. address the perennial intricate problems of transportation and traffic situation in Metro Manila; and
4. enhance employees’ capacity to cope with family and/or personal needs.


V. GUIDELINES/MECHANICS

1. Span of Official Working Hours

1. Working hours in the Department shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. Thus, an employee may opt to begin and end work at a time convenient to him/her each day within the said working time.

2. Flexible Hours

The flexible period within which employees may report for work is between 7:00 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. If on a certain day, an employee arrives at 7:01 a.m., he/she can leave the office at 4:01 p.m.; the next day, if he/she arrives at 8:22 a.m., he/she can leave at 5:22 p.m. and so on. 

Nevertheless, on MONDAYS, all officials and employees shall attend the flag raising ceremony, hence, the flexible period shall only be between  7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In that case, employees who report for work later than 8:00 a.m. shall be considered tardy.

3. Core Time

The period of compulsory attendance, usually referred to as the core time, is from 9:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., exclusive of one hour lunch break which shall be from 12:00 noon to 1:00 p.m.

Therefore, the employees who report for work at 9:31 a.m. or later shall automatically be considered tardy, while those who leave the office with less than 8—hours service rendered during the day shall be considered undertime.

4. Compulsory Skeletal Force

To ensure continuous and efficient service to the public, at least 10% of the total warmbodies 1n each of the organizational unit shall be required to be present from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. This may be on rotation basis, or other arrangement may be devised and agreed upon by the Division Chiefs/Supervisors and subordinates concerned.

5. Synchronization of Work Assignments

The grant of this privilege should not be prejudicial to efficient service delivery of the Department in general and of each office in particular. Hence, to prevent work—related problems arising from the implementation of this new flexitime schedule, all Heads of Offices should discuss and plan with their personnel/staff their respective work schedules considering the unique structure, functions, needs of, and demands from, their organizational unit. Furthermore, in the interest of the service, the Heads of Offices may suspend the implementation of this new system in their respective offices.

6. Restrictions

The adoption of this new flexitime schedule may be wholly or partially restricted by:
a. exigency of the service;
b. adverse effect on the efficiency of operations; 
c. fluctuations in work volume; 
d. voluntary agreement between supervisors and staff, in case of group work and/or meetings; and
e. misuse of privilege manifested by habitual tardiness, absenteeism, loafing around, poor performance, and others.


VI. EVALUATION 

The system shall be evaluated against stated objectives at the end of 6-month implementation. Baseline Data shall be gathered to permit before and after comparisons. The Personnel Division shall design the evaluation scheme and submit its evaluation report to the Secretary one (1) month after the end of the 6-month period. 


VII. SANCTION

Based on the CSC Memorandum Circular No. 5, s. 1997, any violation of this Order shall constitute the offense of Violation of Reasonable Office Rules and Regulations, punishable with reprimand on the first offense, suspension for one (1) to thirty (30) days on the second offense, and dismissal on the third offense. 


VIII. EFFECTIVITY

This Order takes effect on 17 November 1997.

For compliance.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

HAM/bpn
flexi.doc/disk 1
