Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>03/18/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 3-B s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: DOH GUIDELINES ON PAPANICOLAOU SMEAR (PAP SMEAR) PROCEDURE</subject>

<body>

For purposes of implementing a uniform protocol in the conduct of papanicolaou smear (pap smear) for eligible female client, this Department promulgates the following to become the standard protocol for this activity:


THE PAPANICOLAOU SMEAR (PAP SMEAR)


I. DEFINITION OF TERM: 

Papanicolaou Smear - refers to a diagnostic tool, a test used in the screening and early detection of cancer of the lower genital tract particularly that of the cervix (cervical cancer). This is one of the best known, cost effective cancer screening method.


II. COVERAGE/ELIGIBLE CLIENTS

The objective of papanicolaou smear collection in the Cervical Cancer Component (Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project) is to collect satisfactory smears from as many women-at—risk as possible and as cheaply as possible. The aim is to screen women 35-55 years of age once in their lifetime. 


A. Indications

1. Patients at risk for developing Cervical cancer
- Sexually active women especially those between ages 25 - 55 years
- Multipara
- Those with history of STD
2. Those with history of postcoital bleeding, abnormal vaginal discharge.
3. Those with visible signs of change in the tissues.
- cervical erosion
- presence of condyloma/wart



III. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES/STANDARD PROTOCOL 


A. Materials Needed

- Speculum
- Clean slide
- Spatula ( Ayers spatula or popsicle stick), cotton tipped applicator or pledget dipped in NSS or cervical brush
- Fixative (95% ethanol or hair spray) 
— Pencil 


B. Procedure

1. Using a pencil, label the clean slide with the patient’s name.
2. Moisten the speculum with water and NSS and insert the speculum to get a good view of the cervix. Do not use lubricant.
3. Identify the squamocolumnar junction (S-Q). The S - Q junction is the area of the cervix where the smooth, typically pink and shiny squamous epithelium and the reddish columnar epithelium winch presents a rough surface meet. The S - Q junction may be up within the endo-cervical canal if the entire surface surrounding the cervical  os appears smooth and pink.
4. Introduce the Ayers spatula with the narrow end in the endocervical canal and gently but firmly scrape the squamocolumnar junction by rotating the spatula 360 degrees. 
5. Insert a cotton pledget dipped in NSS and swab the endocervix gently but firmly to gather cells from the endocervical canal. A cervical brush maybe used when available. 
6. Spread materials from the S- Q junction and endocervical canal on a clean properly labeled slide.
7. A swab from the lateral vaginal walls may be obtained and spread on the slide especially if maturation index determination is indicated.
8. Quickly immerse the slide in the fixative solution for 30 minutes. If ethanol is not available hairspray may be used.
9. After fixation, air dry slide before sending to laboratory.


Points to remember in taking specimen for Pap Smear

1. Advise patients to refrain from vaginal douche and sexual contact at least 24 hours, before taking the smear. 
2. Although the smear may be taken at anytime during the patient’s menstrual cycle, the best time to take a smear is one week after menstruation when there are less red and other cells that may obscure abnormal cells.
3. In the presence of copious discharge suggestive of infection, the infection should be treated first to minimize the chance of a false (-) or (+) result.
4. Be ready with correctly labeled slides and the fixative before taking the smear.
5. Fix the specimen on the slide immediately in order to minimize changes in the cells. If aerosol hair spray is used, hold it about 1 foot from slide.


Transport to Laboratory

Before sending the slides to the laboratory, pack the specimen properly by placing pads  on both ends of the slides to prevent them from breaking or sticking to each other. Label the package correctly and fill up request form.


Specialized Procedures

1. Refer for colposcopic examination when pap smear is abnormal or when the cervix appears abnormal. 
2. To diagnose the presence of endocervical lesion, endocervical curettage is done.
3. Conization of the cervix may be resorted to under the following circumstances:

- when the endocervical curettage is positive
- when the limits of the colposcopically abnormal areas is not fully visualized (unsatisfactory colposcopy)
- when the punch biopsy specimen cannot definitely rule out invasion

4. For patients with histopathological findings indicating cervical cancer, a complete evaluation, including clinical staging, must be done as soon as possible. 

5. Treatment of invasive cervical cancer should be based on the clinical stage and surgical risk involved.

6. Recommend the appropriate management indicated for the condition. Management of Cervical cancer and its precursors
— CIN
	- CIN I — may be observed or treated with local ablation
	- CTN II — local ablation: Cryotherapy, electrocautery, LEEP
	- CIN III
		Stage IA — Microinvasive disease - simple hysterectomy:
		Stage IB and IIA - Invasive disease — radical hysterectomy, radiotherapy

7. Establish continuing professional but women-friendly relations with patients.

8. Maintain connections with referring health workers and facilities.

This Order supersedes issuances inconsistent herewith.

  
</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

