Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>01/10/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 1-B s, 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: ESTABLISHMENT OF A WOMEN AND CHILDREN PROTECTION UNIT IN ALL DOH HOSPITALS</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE

In response to the increasing number of women and children who consult the hospitals due to violence, rape, incest, and other related cases the Hospital Based Women’s Desk Program known as Project Haven, an Non-Government Organization — Government Organization (NGO-GO) partnership between Women Crisis Center and East Avenue Medical Center was established in 1995 to address their medical and psychological needs. In 1996 a purely GO based Women's Desk was piloted in five other  government hospitals. There was a need to mainstream the vast experience of NGO’s in providing gender—sensitive services for women survivors of violence thus institutionalizing these services within the government health care delivery system was envisioned. Hence, the Hospital — Based Women’s Desk was an initial step towards the institutionalization, sustainability, and replicability in other government hospitals as well as in private hospitals.

Violence against women is not merely a health concern and requires a whole range of medical, social and non—medical interventions and services. To be effective, it needs to be integrated and holistic. There is a need to pool resources, logistics and human resources ( both government and non—government) for a more concerted and systematized training program for care providers. The training program must be multidisciplinary and multilevel in its approach.

Pursuant to Department Circular NO. 47,s. 1997 in response to the Memorandum dated February 5, 1997 by the President of the Philippines on the subject, “ Call to Action  against Domestic Violence” the President has directed all agencies to launch and maintain comprehensive campaign against all forms of violence. In view of all these, the Women’s Desk Program later called the Women and Children Protection Program under the Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulations is institutionalizing the creation of a unit in DOH hospitals that will answer the medical and psychological needs of victims of violence and shall be known as the “WOMEN AND CHILDREN PROTECTION UNIT”.


2. GOAL:

To provide a holistic, gender sensitive health care to women and children who are victims of violence.


3. OBJECTIVES:

GENERAL OBJECTIVE:

To institutionalize the establishment of a Women and Children Protection Unit in the DOH hospitals for victims/survivors of domestic violence, rape, incest, torture, sex trafficking, and other abusive and exploitative acts.

SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:

3.1 To ensure that women and children who consult the DOH hospitals due to violence are treated with utmost care, concern and understanding.
3.2 To create and sustain a women sensitive and women friendly environment within the hospital setting. 
3.3 To sensitize and reorient the staff and all sectors of the hospital to the issue of violence against women and children. 
3.4 To provide training opportunities for the program staff as well as other individuals who may be interested in pursuing a career path relevant to the concern of violence against women and children.
3.5 To develop a systematic gender sensitive documentation and monitoring system. 
3.6 To document experiences which will serve as inputs for policy research, formulation and program improvement.
3.7 To replicate the program concept and procedures in other government hospitals as well as in private hospitals.
3.8 To develop training modules evolved from the experiences of the program, which can be used in other government hospitals and institutions.
3.9 To coordinate with other government and non—government institutions and organizations for a more organized approach to address other non—medical needs of the victims/survivors.


4. KEY COMPONENTS:

Given the multi-faceted nature of the problem of violence against women and children it must be approached from many disciplines that act not in isolation but in collaboration with each other.

As such, the unit shall involve the following components, namely:

4.1 Medical/Surgical, Psychological and Health Services:

It will feature the following:

4.1.1 A 24 hour personalized care and service which includes identification of patients and families in crises, provision of therapeutic and supportive management and assurance of physical security, safety and confidentiality.

4.1.2 A :Women and Children Protection Unit” as a holding and processing area for victims/survivors. This will be manned by a team headed by a women and children coordinator. Once victims are admitted in specific areas the team is also responsible for following up the victims until they are discharged, followed up and/or properly referred. Emphasis is made on the continuity of care to the victims.

4.1.3 A standard patients’ ﬂow and clinical protocol in interviewing, physical examination and management. 

4.1.4 A gender sensitive recording system which also ensures utmost confidentiality. 

4.2 Networking Mechanism:

A holistic and integrated approach will be ensured through an efficient referral and networking system that will mobilize a wide network of GO’s, NGO’s and other institutions involved with violence against women and children 

4.3 Training and Education:

A multi-disciplinary training program will address human resource development needs as well as the need to create and sustain a women sensitive and  friendly hospital environment. The Women and Children Protection Program in the central office will set directions and define a career path for medical and paramedical graduates who might be interested in professionally pursuing this line of work. However, this will be made available net only to hospital personnel but to the community and interested organizations who would like to avail of the training. Training areas may focus on the following:

4.3.1 For trainees to acquire/enhance attitudes necessary in the management of acute and chronic causes of crisis such as sensitivity, compassion, confidentiality and empathy. 

4.3.2 For the trainees to develop/ strengthen their skills in early detection, screening, interviewing, physical examination, use of appropriate diagnostic procedures, management, counseling and referral.

4.3.4 For the trainees to have additional knowledge on understanding of conditions leading to crisis, recognition of early sign of crisis identification, analysis of aggravating/contributory factors including family factors/stresses, understanding of the impact of crisis on the individual the family and the community management of patients and their families networking, linkage development and referral.

4.4 Research:

This component shall be responsible for eliciting. and documenting experiences to serve as inputs for further studies, researches for policy and program improvement. 

4.5 Information and Advocacy: 

This will deal with the development of communication strategies for crisis mitigation prevention and control in the community; dissemination of information about the Women and Children Protection Unit and its activities and advocacy for empowerment of victims. 


5. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATING MECHANISM:

5.1 The Program 

The Women and Children Protection Program shall be established under the Office for Health Facilities Standards and Regulations (OHFSR). The Program shall give advice and policy directions. It shall be handled by a Program Manager. 

The Program shall coordinate with the Chiefs of Hospitals in the operation  and management of the Women and Children Protection Units. The Chiefs of  Hospital shall have administrative supervision over the coordinators of each unit while the Program Manager shall have technical supervision over the said coordinator. 

5.2 The Women and Children Protection Unit:

5.2.1 The Unit shall be an integral part of the hospital.
5.2.2 A Women and Children Protection Unit shall be established and situated at the Emergency Room Complex ( or any room identified for that matter)
5.2.3 The Unit shall be under the Chief of Clinics and has the following  staff who shall be performing their duties in addition to their regular hospital assignment.
a. Women and Children Protection Coordinator
b. Nurse
c. Social worker
d. Psychiatrist/Psychologist (if available)

5.2.3 Each unit shall have the following core services
a. Service
b. Training
c. Research

5.3 The Role of the Hospitals:

5.3.1 Budget: As a priority program of the government, the OHFSR together with the hospitals shall work for the inclusion of the Women and Children Protection Program/Units in the national budgetary allocation. All hospitals should include this in their work and financial plan. 
5.3.2 Manpower: The hospital should designate the personnel necessary for this unit. In the event that there would be additional plantilla positions such manpower requirements should be included.
5.3.3 Support and encourage innovative activities of the program.
5.3.4 Link with other GO’s, NGO’s to enhance support with the WCPU. 
5.3.5 Support the training of the trainers and require all personnel to undergo training on Gender Sensitivity. All personnel especialIlly residents shall have a briefing by the coordinator before rotation in the Emergency Room.

5.4 Responsibilities of the Women and Children Coordinator:

The Coordinator shall be responsible for:

5.4.1. Integrating all functions of the Women and Children Protection Unit.

5.4.2 Organizing a team within the hospital that would man the unit and take charge of all activities of the unit. The size of the team will depend on the size, type and needs of the hospital. She would likewise be responsible in coordinating with the different departments and offices within the hospital to facilitate in the implementation of the unit.

5.4.2. Coming up with the work and financial plan of the unit including the budget preparation.

5.4.3. Submission of quarterly reports to the Undersecretary of Health  Facilities, Standards and Regulation attention to the Program Manager of the Women and Children Protection Program.

The name of the designated Coordinator shall be submitted to the Office for Health Facilities Standards and Regulation and shall be issued out through a Department Order.

6. Effectivity: This order shall take effect on March 2, 1998.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, M.D., MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
