Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila 
Telephone No: 743-83-01 to 23 loc. 1125-1131

<date>05/09/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 8-A s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Amendment to the Administrative Order No. 21-A s. 1996</subject>

<body>

SUBJECT: 

Administrative Order No. 21-A s. 1996 includes the Guidelines for the Development and implementation of the DOH Women's Health and Safe Motherhood Project Maternal Care Delivery Civil Works Sub-component.

To obviate confusion on Project Development and Implementation, provisions. Nos.3.3.1; 3.3.2; 3.3.3; 3.3.4; 3.3.5; 3.4.2; 3.4.3.1; 3.4.4.1; 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 thereof are hereby modified to read:

3.3 PROJECT DOCUMENTATION

3.3.1 This phase of work will focus on the preparation and approval of bid documents which include among others, Instruction to Bidders, Detailed Architectural and Engineering Plans, Technical Specification, General Conditions, Detailed Direct Cost Estimates with unit cost analysis for materials and labor and other related bidding documents like Bid Bulletin, etc.

3.3.2 The Bid Documents shall be prepared by the CONSULTANT using the funding agency's Standard Bidding Documents for Procurement of Civil Works, Asian Development Bank or international Bank for Reconstruction and Development as the case may be.

3.3.3 The Approved Agency Estimate (AAE) shalt be jointly prepared by the Regional Civil Engineer in coordination with the Provincial and or Municipal Engineer accordingly using the submitted Approved Direct Cost Estimates of the Consultant and to be approved by the Regional Health Director at least 2 days prior to the bidding date.

3.3.4 The DOH—INFRA shall assist the PMO in the review, evaluation and final approval of the Bidding Documents.

3.3.5 As a rule the Bidding Documents will be approved following the order set forth in item 3.2.5 (a).


3.4 PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 

3.4.1 X X X

3.4.2 The public bidding and awarding of contracts of projects partly or wholly financed from international institutions will be conducted using the guidelines stipulated by the lending agency. However, provisions of PD 1594 (Rules and Regulations for the Implementation of Government Infrastructure Projects) as amended and DOH A.O. 40 s. 1996 shall apply in supplementary character.

3.4.3 X X X

3.4.3.1 The RIPBAC shall submit to the DOH—WHSMP the bidding documents of the first three lowest complying bidder including the Abstract of Bids, Minutes of the Pre- bidding Conference and Bidding Proper, Bids Evaluation Report and Resolution to Award before any award shall be made. These documents shall be sent to the funding agency for concurrence. 

3.4.4 X X X

3.4.4.1 The Regional Health Director shall be the contracting party in the Owner-Contractor Agreement and approved by the WHSMP Project Director. 

3.4.5 The regular construction supervision of the projects will be the responsibility of the engineering units of the Office of the Governor and Mayor concerned as provided for in the Project Implementation Agreement (PIA) between the DOH and the Local
Government Units. They shall submit a Monthly Progress Report to the Regional Health Office not later than every 10th day of the succeeding month using the standard report of the DOH-WHSMP.

3.4.6 The funding Agency guidelines shall be used in the contract implementation up to project acceptance and turn-over, however, PD 1594 provisions shall be used in the absence of the funding agency guidelines.

4.0 SELECTION CRITERIA AND SCOPE OF WORK FOR CIVIL WORKS 

Anent the purpose of physically preparing health facilities to be upgraded under WHSMP, it is deemed necessary to include in Administrative Order No. 21 s. 1996 the selection criteria and the scope of civil works. Thus: 

A. First Referral-Level Hospitals (Provincial and District)

The causes of maternal deaths are often directly related to the need for interventions beyond primary health care capabilities. The first referral level obstetric hospital is therefore needed to provide these services. The essential obstetric functions at the first referral level are:

(i) to perform caesarean sections
(ii) to give anaesthetic
(iii) to give blood transfusions 
(iv) to carry out curettage for incomplete/septic abortions/miscarriages 
(v) to perform other minor surgical OB intervention such as voluntary surgical contraception 
(vi) to give neonatal special care

First referral facilities are deﬁned as hospitals able to provide emergency obstetric procedures at any time.

Selection Criteria for Provincial Hospital

The final selection of provincial hospitals will be based on the following criteria:

(i) facility to which the rural health midwives, and rural health doctors can directly refer;
(ii) requires upgrading of obstetric facilities (measured against a standard list of needs) to provide good quality, safe, and essential first-referral level facilities; 
(iii) if the provincial hospital is within 15 to 30 minutes of the regional medical center which can receive referrals direct from the rural health unit staff then the provincial hospital should not be upgraded; 
(iv) no facility will be upgraded to first referral level unless it already has the basic elements to provide emergency obstetric care already available or guaranteed by the provincial government (the package of needs is the minimum required and cannot be reduced or modiﬁed); and 
(v) no facility will be upgraded for obstetrics care if the whole facility is in very poor condition and not planned for rehabilitation, or if a new facility is being planned, or if another financing source is planning improvements or upgrading.

Additional Selection Criteria for District Hospitals

In addition to the criteria outlined above, the following criteria will apply to district hospitals that are to be upgraded: 

(i) 25-bed capacity or greater;
(ii) a facility to which the rural health midwives, and rural health doctors can directly refer, which is a maximum of 2 hours via local transportation for most of the rural population; 
(iii) the facility has staff available to support 24 hour intensive nursing and emergency surgical care; and a minimum staff allocation of 4 doctors, 6 nurses and 8-12 trained midwives; and
(iv) LGU is committed to support the district hospital's operation and maintenance expenses. 

Scope of Work ,

Each first referral hospital will be upgraded to have a fully operational obstetrics unit including:

(a) a labor room,
(b) a delivery room,
(c) an operating room,
(d) a septic room,
(e) an isolation room,
(f) an examination room,
(g) a nursery for intensive neonatal care,
(h) a reception and triage area,
(i) a recovery room,
(j) a sterilizing room, and
(k) adequate water, sanitation, and electricity infrastructure;

The decision of whether to build annexes or not in the provincial hospital is to be made by the end user in coordination with the WHSM-Project Management Office, based on utilization rates and human resource complement. If in case the above criteria can not be accommodated, the minimum requirements of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulations, Department of Health for provincial and district hospitals shall be followed.

B. Rural Health Units (RHU)

The rural health unit is the closest full~time staff facility providing primary health care to a community. These facilities have a rural health midwife on call at all times. RHUs provide primary health care minor surgery, (e.g., wound dressings, suturing) antenatal and postnatal care, family planning (pill and condom distribution insertion and removal of intrauterine devices), nutrition, management of common infectious diseases, counseling and preventive intervention (e.g. immunization) 

Issues that presently compromise the quality of these services provided at these facilities include lack of privacy for clients; poor management of sterile conditions; poorly maintained facilities and equipment; lack of essential equipment, drugs, and supplies; lack of reliable and clean sources of water and power; poor sanitation facilities, especially needed for women undergoing internal examinations and for antenatal clients. 

Selection Criteria 

RHUs that are selected should:

(i) have a permanent or assigned rural health physician;
(ii) have a staff who is a resident of the catchment area where the RHU is being upgraded where this staff can be called anytime from his / her residence to provide for emergency obstetrical care;
(iii) serve larger population catchment areas with easy access to the facility than other RHUs; 
(iv) be accessible to most communities and to the first referral level facility;
(v) no RHU will be upgraded if the whole facility is in very poor conditions and not planned for rehabilitation, or if a new facility is being planned, or if another financing source is planning improvements or upgrading; 
(vi) no RHU will be upgraded if the facility is less than 5 kilometers from any public health facilities; and
(vii) have political and community will and support.

Scope of Work

The Project will upgrade the facility to increase its capacity to provide acceptable, safe; and quality women's health service by:

(i) repairing existing infrastructure such as roof, ceiling, guttering, paintwork; 
(ii) providing for connection to local electricity source if available;
(iii) improving water supply to the facility;
(iv) improving sanitation facilities;
(v) improving the capacity to provide privacy for clients for physical eXaminations and counseling by having a separate room for this purpose; 
(vi) improving the storage capacities for essential drugs and equipment;
(vii) providing capacity for observation area for clients who may need observation i.e. prenatal/consultation room; and 
(viii) placing on the front door a board to notify visitors of the location of staff on call during weekends and nights.

Barangay Health Stations (BHS)

The barangay health station is the health post where the rural health midwife may base her work, and from where she may serve one to three barangays. The BHS should provide primary health care; antenatal and postnatal care; family planning (pill and condom distribution); management of common infectious diseases; nutrition; preventive intervention  (e.g. immunization) and counseling.

Issues that presently compromise the quality of services provided at these facilities include lack of privacy for clients when requested; poor management of sterile conditions; poorly maintained facilities and equipment; lack of essential equipment, drugs, and supplies; lack of reliable and clean sources of water and power; poor sanitation facilities, especially needed for women undergoing internal examinations and for antenatal clients.

Selection Criteria

(i) serve larger population catchment areas with easy access to the facility than other BHSs - eg. BHS that can centrally serve three to five barangays; 
(ii) in situation that catchment area of an RHU that is being upgraded;
(iii) accessibility to the communities

(iv) no BHS will be upgraded if the facility is in very poor condition and not planned for rehabilitation, or if a new facility is being planned, or if another financing source is planning improvements or upgrading.
(v) no BHS will be upgraded if the facility does not have a permanent assigned midwife;
(vi) political and community will and support.

Scope of Work

To increase its capacity to provide an acceptable, safe, and quality women's health service, the Project will:

(i) repair existing infrastructure such as roof, ceiling, guttering, paintwork;
(ii) provide for connection to local electricity source if available;
(iii) improve water supply to the facility;
(iv) improve sanitation facilities;
(v) improve the capacity to provide privacy for clients by having separate room for this purpose; and
(vi) improve the storage capacities for essential drugs and equipment.

D. Lying-in Clinics

The lying-in clinics offer services for safe deliveries; beds in which to rest for a few hours before returning home postpartum; and postdelivery counseling on mother and child care, family planning, and other aspects of women's health. They also provide an opportunity for the midwife to supervise deliveries by traditional birth attendants and in-service training. They will serve as a point for stabilizing a women prior to transfer if she is suffering from an obstetrical complication.

The lying-in clinic will be attached/in the grounds of an RHU.

Selection Criteria

The RHUs that will be upgraded to provide lying-in clinic services will:

(i) already have staff to provide services for women on a 24-hour basis;
(ii) be located to areas that are easily reached by most of the population;
(iii) be in the district with hospital that will be upgraded to first referral level obstetrical service capacities; and
(iv) be near the main road.

Scope of Work

(i) a three-bed labor/post delivery room,
(ii) a delivery room,
(iii) a toilet and bathroom,
(iv) piped water,
(v) electricity,
(vi) three beds and bedside tables, and
(vii) equipment for RHU midwives.

E. Maternity Waiting Homes

The maternity waiting home provide pregnant women in hard to reach areas with a temporary residence where they can be observed prior to delivery. This facility has a space where food can be prepared (kitchen), laundry done, etc. Women should treat it like a home, and should accompanied by a family member. While in the residence, the pregnant woman can be more closely monitored by the first referral level obstetric facility through provision of prenatal care and can be quickly admitted to the first referral level facility (i) at the onset of labor, (ii) at the first sign of any complications, or (iii) if an unanticipated complication arises. The facility addresses two problems regarding early management of obstetric complications. 

(i) Women who are identified as having high-risk pregnancies may not like to stay for long periods of time in a hospital away from family members, in unfamiliar surroundings and where they believe sick people should be.

(ii) Women who may need intervention can be quickly transferable to the hospital at the onset of labor or a problem.

Maternity waiting homes will be in the grounds of the selected provincial hospital.

Selection Criteria

The selected provincial hospital that will be upgraded to provide maternity waiting home will:

(i) have a catchment area population that is hard to reach;
(ii) have a facility with catchment area that have high levels of maternal deaths, perinatal mortality and morbidity;
(iii) have adequate space to establish a maternity waiting home;
(iv) have adequate human resource complement.

Hard to reach area for this purpose means that a referral facility can only be reached by hiking for 2 hours or more or referral facility can only be reached seasonally. 

Scope of Work
(i) 2 three—bed room,
(ii) toilet and bathroom,
(iii) a kitchenette cum dining/receiving room,
(iv) piped water,
(v) electricity,
(vi) 6 beds and 3 bedside tables

F. Utilization of Savings for Variation Order

Any amount of savings as a result of lower bids shall be used in the following prioritized item of works. Such savings shall be reprogrammed only within the province concerned.

Priority Item of Work

1. Repair or Replacement of Roofing 
2. Flooring Finishes (except toilet) - use Vinyl Tiles 1.5 mm thick 
3. Repainting of rooting, walls ceiling, doors 
4. Repair / Replacement glazed and unglazed tiles for toilets
5. Repair / Replacement of windows.

All other provisions of AO 21—A s. 1996 shall remain in effect.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, MD, MPH., CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

AO 21-WHSMP