Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES


<date>11/12/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 28 s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the conduct of the Annual Medical Examination for DOH Central Office Employees by Medical Examination and Department Infirmary (MEDI)</subject>

<body>


I. Rationale 

Government employees are entitled to medical services and other health program benefits initiated at the agency s medical unit/service. The basic laws of the land such as the Labor Code and Magna Carta of Public Health Workers are explicit in the provision of medical services and benefits to employees and the health worker, respectively.

The Medical Examination and Department Infirmary (MEDI) of the Administrative Service of the Department of Health is mandated to provide medical and laboratory examinations and consultations to its employees and dependents. MEDI has been conducting the annual medical examination since 1986 but only an estimated twenty five percent of the total employees in the Department regularly avail of these medical services. A Department Memo was issued in 1993, advising employees to consult the MEDI in line with the Department’s Preventive and Promotive Health Program but still this move has not done much in increasing the awareness and use of the existing medical services. 

The following guidelines is being formulated with the intent of providing information of the medical services available at MEDI. Given this information it is hoped that employees in the DOH Central Office will value and utilize more fully the medical services offered at MEDI.


II. Scope and Coverage 

The conduct of the annual medical examination covers only permanent employees of the DOH, Central Office. Dependents of employees can also avail of the same medical services offered to its employees. 

The dependents of employees shall include the closest kin members. In the case of a married employee, his/her dependent shall include the spouse and children. If employee is unmarried, his/her dependents shall include the parents and minor brothers and sisters.


III. General Guidelines

MEDI shall conduct the annual medical examination which is scheduled during the natal month of the employee. The latter shall take responsibility in securing an appointment with any of the attending physician in MEDI for the required medical examination.

The following are the minimum and routinary procedures undertaken during the medical examination: 

1) Complete physical examination- which includes body inspection, palpation and auscultation

2) Laboratory examination - which includes blood, urine, and stool examination. Women aged 40 years old and over will be advised to undergo a PAP smear examination

3) Chest X- Ray

4) Employees who are 40 years old and above will be advised to undergo an electrocardiogram (ECG) examination. Those who are below 40 years old may be subjected to an ECG examination if the attending physician deems it necessary.

5) Dental examination

MEDI shall provide for other medical services as deemed necessary and the resources (i. e reagents, drugs, manpower, etc) to undertake the procedures are made available through donors, voluntary services, and the like. These services include the following: 

(a) immunization - BCG, Oral Polio/DPT, Measles/MMR, Hepatitis B, Choleral-Typhoid

(b)Pre and post exposure prophylaxis on all animal bite cases

(c) Malarial screenings

(d) PPD Tests

(e) Acupuncture


IV. Procedures

1) The attending physician shall conduct the physical examination. The former shall also make the necessary request for laboratory examination, chest X ray and other medical test required of the employee.

2) Urine and stool specimen for laboratory examination must be contained in sterilized and tightly covered bottle containers. The quantity of the  specimen must be : 60 cc of mid stream urine and, a thumb size amount of stool.

3) Urine and stool specimen must be submitted to the Laboratory before 9:00 AM from Monday-Friday.

4) Results of all laboratory examination and chest X ray will be forwarded to the attending physician.

5) The attending physician shall advise the employee when to secure the results of the medical examination. The attending physician shall likewise provide the appropriate medical counsel and information.

6) In case of abnormal findings, the attending physician shall administer the appropriate case management or treatment.

7) Serious case problems which will require further medical procedure or surgical intervention shall be referred to the appropriate hospital for proper management/treatment.

8) The attending physician shall ensure the recording and completeness of the results of the medical examination of the employee. A summary report of abnormal and serious case findings shall be prepared by the attending physician and submitted to the Chief of the MEDI for information and appropriate action.

9) The Chief of MEDI shall inform the Service/Bureau Director of the employee regarding abnormal or serious case findings for the requisite consideration. Confidentiality in handling reports/findings shall be strictly observed.


V. Attachments

Attached are the sample forms used in recording the results of the medical
examination and the referral slip.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA N. REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
