Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>06/09/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 11-A s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Implementation of the 1997 Physical Plant Maintenance Program for Retained Hospitals and Health Facilities, Offices and all Other Buildings of the Department of Health</subject>

<body>

1.0. BACKGROUHD

1.1 The Physical Plant Maintenance Program of the Department of Health is part of the overall DOH Health Infrastructure Project. its target objective is the institution of preventive and corrective maintenance system for the physical plant and utilities of retained hospitals and health facilities, offices and all other buildings of the DOH;

1.2 The Physical Plant Maintenance Program will consist of two major activities namely:

1.2.1 Preventive Maintenance - pertains to planned scheduled and cyclic tasks of parts replacement, condition monitoring and general gathering of information in order to prevent untimely breakdown of building and utility elements to maintain their desired operating performance levels;

1.2.2 Corrective Maintenance — involves repair of building and utility elements to correct confirmed abnormalities or deteriorating conditions. It will also include the installation of new building parts or elements to fit changing office or space needs;

1.3 For 1997, the funding source for Preventive Maintenance Work of hospitals and offices will be taken from their individual MOOE funds.

1.4 For 1997 the funding source for Corrective Maintenance Work of hospitals and offices will be taken from their individual non-infra capital outlay.

2.0 PROGRAM ORGANIZATION AND MACHINERY

2.1 The Health Infrastructure Service (INFRA) of the DOH under the Office for Health Facilities Standards and Regulations (OHFSR) shall maintain the overall management, including monitoring, of the Physical Plant Maintenance Program;

2.2 As in the previous year, the Regional Health Offices (RHOs) through the Regional Civil Engineers shall provide the INFRA with the technical staff counterpart in the management, including monitoring, of the Maintenance Program of hospitals and offices under their respective regional jurisdiction;

2.3 The system for the Maintenance Program, including scheduling, execution, and monitoring procedures, will be based on DOH uniform standards and technical guidelines which are detailed in two reference manuals prepared by the INFRA, namely: Manual for Schedule of Physical Plant Maintenance Program and Manual for Maintenance of Hospitals and Health Facilities. 

3.0 WORK PROTOCOL

3.1 Preventive Maintenance

For Preventive Maintenance Work, the following activities shall be conducted:

3.1.1 Funding Request 

a. The request for funds for preventive maintenance should be INITIATED by every hospital and office and should be reflected in their annual MOOE Plan;

b. For 1997, all DOH retained hospitals and offices have been reminded by the INFRA to utilize funds in their MOOE for preventive maintenance work;

3.1.2 Preparation of Scope of Prioritized Preventive Maintenance Work - 

a. The Hospital or Office Maintenance Staff shall prepare a prioritised list of preventive maintenance work on a monthly basis;

b. The list shall be based on requests by end-users of areas needing preventive maintenance and from the results of regular physical plant check-up by the maintenance staff;

c. The list shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer for validation and recommendation for approval;

d. The AO will submit the list to the Chief of Hospital or Head of Office, as the case may be, for final approval.

3.1.3 Procurement of Work Items - 

The procurement of supplies and other work items shall be conducted by the Hospital or Office Procurement Staff subject to accounting and auditing rules and regulations

3.1.4 Preparation of Drawings - 

The preparation of drawings and other documents reflecting the preventive maintenance work shall be done by the Hospital or Office Maintenance Staff as the case may be

3.1.5 Execution of Work Items - 

The execution and timely completion of preventive maintenance work shall be the responsibility of the Hospital or Office Maintenance Staff. 

3.2 Corrective Maintenance 

For Corrective Maintenance Work, the following activities shall be conducted;

3.2.1 Funding Request 

a. The request for funds for corrective maintenance should be INITIATED by every hospital and office and should be reflected either in their capital outlay plans;

b. For 1997, all DOH retained hospitals and offices have been advised by the INFRA to include corrective maintenance work in their non-infra projects listing.

3.2.2 Preparation of Scope of Prioritized Corrective Maintenance Work:

a. The Hospital or Office Maintenance Staff shall prepare a prioritized list of corrective maintenance work on an annual or semi-annual basis; 

b. The list shall be based on requests by end-users of areas needing corrective repair and from the results of regular physical plant check-up by the maintenance staff.

c. The list shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer for validation and indorsement to the Chief of Hospital or Head of Office, as the case may be; and

d. The Chief of Hospital or Head of Office will submit the list to the INFRA for review and recommendation for final approval by the Undersecretary, OHFSR.

3.2.3 Project Documentation 

The preparation of architecture and engineering plans, technical specifications, detailed estimates and other documents necessary for bidding and procurement of a contractor for the corrective maintenance work project shall be conducted by the Hospital or Office Maintenance Staff.

3.2.4 The INFRA and the Regional Health Offices, through the Regional Civil Engineers, shall provide the technical assistance in project documentation for work beyond the in-house capability of hospital and office maintenance staff.

3.2.5 Project Implementation

a. The procedures for project implementation including bidding, awarding of contract, variation orders and other pre-construction and construction activities shall comply with PD 1594. Guidelines for implementation of Government Infrastructure Projects, as amended:

b. The provisions stipulated in AO 40 s. 1996 (Delegation of Signing Authority) shall likewise govern project implementation procedures.

c. The Hospital or Office Maintenance Staff shall be responsible for the daily supervision of corrective maintenance work projects

3.2.6 Monitoring and Reporting

a. The Hospital or Office Administrative Officers shall monitor the progress of corrective maintenance work. They shall see to it that the monthly reports of physical and financial accomplishment, as prepared by Hospital or Office Maintenance Staff, are submitted to the INFRA, copy furnished the Regional Heath Directors and the Undersecretary, OHFSR.

b. The INFRA in turn shall prepare the overall report of physical and financial accomplishment of the DOH 1997 Corrective Maintenance Work Projects on a quarterly basis;

c. The monthly status reports shall use the standard format prescribed by the INFRA in the manuals referred to in item 2.3. 

3.2.7 Final Acceptance and Turnover of Projects.

The final acceptance and turnover of corrective maintenance work by the Hospital or Office Administrative Officer and approved by the Chief of Hospital or Head of Office, as the case may be. 

4.0 TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO DOH UNITS AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS

4.1 The INFRA shall provide the necessary technical assistance to hospital and office maintenance staff in the application and quality assurance of the DOH uniform standards and technical guidelines for the Physical Plant Maintenance Program;

4.2 The INFRA, through the help of their RHO counterparts, will continuously provide the orientation training and technical assistance to devolved hospitals and offices in the application and quality assurance of the same DOH uniform standards and technical guidelines for maintenance.

All other existing issuances inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby rescinded.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA N. REODICA, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>