Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
MANILA


San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-80-80  

<date>04/17/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No.  s.1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF BARANGAY HEALTH WORKERS (BHW) SCHOLARSHIP UNDER THE INTEGRATED COMMUNITY HEALTH SERVICES PROJECT (ICHSP)</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE AND LEGAL BASIS

Republic Act No: 7883, otherwise known as the “Barangay Health Workers” Benefits and Incentives Act of 1995”, formally recognizes the role of Barangay Health Workers (BHWS) in health and development. One of the provisions of the
law provides that the accredited BHWs be entitled to educational programs and scholarship benefits to enable them to upgrade their skills and knowledge in  rendering their services to the community.

Pursuant to the law, the Integrated Community Health Services Project (ICHSP) establishes a Barangay Health Workers Scholarship Program for Midwifery courses only, which can be availed of as part of the incentive packages to the voluntary services of BHWs.



II. OBJECTIVES 

The Barangay Health Workers Scholarship Program (BHWSP) is established to achieve the following objectives:

A. To provide an incentive package through a scholarship grant which will encourage the participation of community volunteer health workers in the implementation of primary health care programs in the barangays;

B. To establish an education plan which will develop and/or upgrade the competence, knowledge and skills of health workers involved in the community work;

C. To strengthen linkages with the LGUs, NGOs and private institutions in improving the human resource development system in the province



III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE

The BHWSP Shall be open to qualified BHWs in ICHSP Project Provinces, namely, Apayao, Kalinga, Guimaras, Palawan, South Cotabato and Surigao del Norte. It shall cover scholarship grants leading to a Certificate Course in Midwifery offered in academic institutions using a community — based midwifery curriculum such as those conducted under the Step-Ladder Program in the University of Northern Philippines, Vigan, Ilocos Sur, University of the Philippines, Palo, Leyte; Davao Medical School Foundation, Davao City; Western Mindanao State University, Zamboanga City and Ago Medical Educational Center, Legazpi City.



IV. RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION OF APPLICANTS


A. General Policies:

1. The application to the BHWSP is by nomination of the household heads of the community served by the nominated BHW.
2. All applications are subject to selection evaluation by an established Provincial BHW Scholarship Committee based on the guidelines prescribed under this Order. The Scholarship Committee, may prescribe additional qualifications assessment criteria which are not inconsistent with these guidelines to ensure that the best qualified are selected to avail of the scholarship grant;
3. The scholarship grants shall be approved in accordance with the number of available slots per province.
4. The final selection of grantees shall be decided by the academic institutions based on their own admission policies and requirements.
5. An open competitive nomination and selection process shall be established to ensure an equitable allocation of grantees from recipient LGUs.

6. Priority shall be given to applicant BHWs working in communities classified as Targeted Areas for Development (TAD) as deﬁned by the DOH—CHS and/or areas under the Social Reform Agenda Program.


B. Qualifications of Nominated Applicant

1. The follOwing shall be the qualifications of the nominated BHW applicant:

a) a Filipino citizen
b) duly registered and accredited BHW as per RA 7883
c) bonaﬁde resident in the barangay of the recipient municipality
d) physically and mentally fit
e) must not be more than forty (40) years old at the time of the application
f) at least a high school graduate 
g) must have rendered active exemplary and continuous work in the community for at least two (2) years as BHW
h) Endorsement from the barangay and Municipal Council


C. Application Requirements

1. The following requirements shall be submitted in the application for the scholarship grant

a) application letter addressed to the Provincial BHW Scholarship Committee
b) Birth Certificate
c) BHW Registration and Accreditation Certificate
d) Certification of Residence from the Barangay Chairman
e) Medical Certificate from a government physician
f) High School Diploma
g) An accomplishment report for the past two (2) years as certified by the Rural Health Midwife assigned to the community where the BHW rendered voluntary primary health care service, or by a duly authorized representative of an NGO operating in the community
h) Nomination signatures of at least sixty percent (60%) of the household heads of the community served
i) Training Agreement among the BHW applicant, the Barangay Council and the Municipal Council stipulating among other provisions the agreement to render services to the community for a period of two (2) years for every year of training. A sample of the Training Agreement is attached to this document as ANNEX “A”.
j)Two (2) passport size pictures


D. Evaluation of Applicants 

1. The application of candidates shall be initially” assessed by the Barangay Health Worker Scholarship Committee using the following general evaluation criteria:

a) Performance as a Barangay Health Worker in the community
b) Behavioral Aptitude to pursue further studies
c) Commitment to serve the community
d) Intelligence Aptness for higher learning
e) Community Leadership

The Committee shall determine the specific factors to be included in the abovementioned criteria. It shall have the discretion to assign quantitative point. Moreover, it may also prescribe additional assessment criteria to ensure that the best are selected.

2. The final evaluation and selection shall be done by the academic institutions, which shall decide on the admission of the applicant/s based on their admission policies and procedures. In cases where a limited number of admissions can be accommodated in a particular school, it shall be the policy to prioritize those with high—ranking results.


E. Provincial BHW Scholarship Committee

1. Composition

A Provincial BHW Scholarship Committee shall be organized and shall be chaired by the Provincial Health Officer. Members should include the Provincial DOH—Representative and BHW Federation President among others. The Committee shall have the option to include other entities a members. The Project Implementation Unit should provide secretariat support (PIU).

2. Functions

The Committee shall perform the following functions:

a) initially assess the qualifications of the applicants based on the developed criteria 
b) review, validate and evaluate the documents submitted
c) indorse the applicants to the academic institutions for admission
d) submit a list of accepted scholars to HMDTD/HMDTS



V. SCHOLARSHIP BENEFITS

The Scholarship Grant shall cover the following financial assistance and benefits,
which are chargeable against the ICHSP Project Funds: 

1. Tuition and Miscellaneous Fees	Actual Amount
2. Stipend per Month 			P 2000.00
3. Cost of Living Allowance 		P 2000.00
4. Book Allowance 			P 3000.00
5. Uniform Allowance per year 		P 1500.00

The travelling allowances including those for the practicum and community work shall he charged against the ICHSP Project Fund:



VI. MONITORING AND EVALUATION

The performance of the BHW Scholarship Program Grantees shall be continuously monitored and evaluated. At the end of every semester, the BHW Scholar shall submit its most recent academic record progress report to the Chairman of the BHWSP Committee. A summary of the provincial report shall be made by the ICHSP-PIU and submitted to the DOH—Regional Field Office and central HMDTS.

A meeting of scholars with the BHWSP Scholarship Committee, barangay and Municipal Councils, may be organized to assess the performance of the scholars and determine their needs for possible Program’s policy formulation.



VII. SPECIAL PROVISIONS


A. A duly notarized Training Agreement shall be executed between the barangay and Municipal Council, the BHW Scholarship Committee IaInId the scholar to include the following:

1. Guarantee identified support in the form of traveling expenses to and from the learning institution
2. Proof of acceptance by the LGU or priority in hiring a health worker
3. Two (2) years payback service for every year of training


B. In cases, where students fail to complete their studies, corresponding payback services shall be rendered except for valid reasons as determined by the Provincial BHW Scholarship Committee on a case to case basis.



VIII. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

These guidelines shall take effect June 1998 and remain applicable until such time that the project fund is no longer available and or the Project is terminated. Any guidelines inconsistent with the provisions of this issuance shall not be applied.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>