Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>06/15/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 21 s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Institutionalization of the Health and Management Information System (HAMIS) within the Department of Health</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The Health and Management Information System (HAMIS) started as a technical cooperation project between the Department of Health (DOH) and the German Development Cooperation (GTZ). Its mandate is to develop health and management infOrmation system tools to improve effectiveness; efficiency and equity of health management and health care. In 1995, under the General Appropriations Act R.A. No. 7845, it was given its own budget under the Health Information and Health Education Services. This is in fulfillment of the bilateral agreement between the governments of the Republic of the Philippines and Federal Republic of Germany. On the same year, HAMIS was recognized as one of the National Health Programs under the HEALTHNET and a Program Manager was assigned to manage the same said Program. For the next years up to the present the HAMIS Program of the DOH has been given its own line-item budget.

During the HAMIS Project’s term, from 1989 to 1998, different HAMIS tools were developed and implemented in 77 health facilities nationwide (see attached Appendix I, list of HAMIS information systems, and Appendix II, List of HAMIS Information Systems Users). In  addition, 160 initiatives in good health management practices that was discovered nationwide were formed into a network (see attached Appendix III, Directory of HAMIS Winners). The different HAMIS tools helped health managers both at the National and the Local levels in using information for decision making. This was made possible by organizing Qualityl Assurance Conferences for Hospitals in Luzon (monthly) and the Visayas and Mindanao (quarterly). The development of the Regional Information Center for Health in DIRFO 10 also helped in replicating these different HAMIS tools in Mindanao and the Visayas, aside from offering a model for a health and management information structure at the DIRFO level.

On May 31 1998, the German contribution to the project ends after a partnership of nine years. In preparation for this transfer, as early as 1995, the DOH has already assigned a Program  Manager to manage most of HAMIS project activities and allocated funding from GOP.

To effectively pursue and sustain the different HAMIS tools and other modules that were developed to enhance the efficiency and effectivity of the Department and the Health Sector in using information for decision—making, it is imperative that the concerned offices within the DOH take the initiative to implement the said activities.

This Order is hereby issued to institutionalize the Health and Management Information System (HAMIS) by 1999 and prescribe guidelines for the pre-institutionalization process within the next seven (7) months.


II. OBJECTIVES 

1. To institutionalize an effective mechanism for strengthening and  improving management information systems within the Department of Health.
2. To effectively pursue and sustain the MIS tools developed by HAMIS.
3. To ensure that there is a unit within the Department of Health that will initiate/take over the management of the HAMIS Program.


III. HAMIS KEY AREAS/ACTIVITIES FOR TURN-OVER TO DOH

1. Development, installation and training users of different HAMIS information systems modules (in 68 government hospitals, 10 DIRFOs, in a good number of provinces, municipalities and barangays). See Appendix I, list of HAMIS Information Systems.

2. Discovery of 160 HAMIS winners after 3 HAMIS contests, recognizing and supporting them through the Federation of HAMIS Winners in the Phil. through winners clubs and the HAMIS Academy whose combined experiences constitute a source of innovative programs and bottoms up policies. See Appendix II, list of HAMIS Winners in the Philippines.

3. Development of a model for an integrated Regional Information Center for Health (RICH) in DIRFO 10.

4. Organization of the Quality Assurance Club Quarterly Conference for Visayas and Mindanao and a monthly conference in Lucena.


IV. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE

1. Roles and Responsibilities ‘

1.a) DOH Central Ofﬁce

a.) Office of the Chief of Staff

The OCS through the Health Intelligence Service will be the over-all coordinator of all the HAMIS activities. Such work shall be coordinated by OCS through HIS during a pre-institutionalization period that shall not go beyond December 1998.

The OCS shall sustain partnership as necessary with the Federation of HAMIS Winners in the Philippines. 

The following offices will be the technical arm that will continue to implement or adapt HAMIS activities where it is relevant for their own sphere of work: 

a.1) Health Intelligence Service (HIS)

a.2.) Management Advisory Service (MAS)

a.3) Hospital Operations and Management Service (HOMS)

a.4) Bureau of Licensing and Regulations (BLR)

a.5) Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS)

a.6) Community Health Service (CHS) 

a.7) Local Government Assistance Monitoring Service (LGAMS) 

1.b) Health Intelligence Service

The HIS retained HAMIS personnel as consultants for 7 months shall facilitate that the different activities of HAMIS become integrated in the abovementioned offices to prepare the respective offices for full institutionalization. 

1.c) DOH Integrated Regional Field Office 10

The DIRFO 10 under the command responsibility of the Regional Health Director will continuously support the Regional Information Center for Health in Mindanao. This will be by designating personnel, organizing infrastructure and providing technical assistance to other DIRFOs in Mindanao. DIRFO 10 shall supervise any sub-allotted funds for RICH Mindanao operations. Opening RICH programs in other regions if the Mindanao experience works is also one of DIRFO 10’s tasks.

2. Management of HAMIS Resources

The Health Intelligence Service under the supervision of the Office of the Chief of Staff will be the service directly responsible for managing all assets, facilities, equipment and budget of the HAMIS program. Likewise, all
contractual personnel that will be hired by the same said Program will report directly to the Director of the Health Intelligence Service.

The incumbent HAMIS Program Manager, Dr. Benjamin Ariel Marte, shall prepare a turn-over of the HAMIS Program to the Office of the Chief of Staff within 30 days upon the effectivity of this Order.

3. Funding/Budget

The Office of the Chief of Staff through HIS will be responsible for sustaining budget allocation for HAMIS. This will ensure continuation of Program’s activities and information systems.

4. Monitoring/Feedback

A monitoring and feedback for the pre-institutionalization phase of HAMIS will be done every month. All activities related to these will be reported to the Office of the Chief of Staff through the Health Intelligence Service in one of the OCS’ meetings held once a week.


V. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

This Order shall take effect immediately. 

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
