Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>02/13/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 5 s, 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines in STD Case Management at the Different Levels of the Health Care System</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE

To enable health facilities to provide acceptable, affordable and effective management of STD cases these guidelines specifically seek to:

A. Set standards for the implementation of syndromic STD case management at all levels of health are.
B. Define roles, functions and requirements in the provision of STD services at all levels of health care. 
C. Establish the referral system of STD case management.
D. Provide reporting mechanism at the different levels of care. 
E. Set the extent of care and technical boundaries that can be provided at the different levels of care.

Administrative Order No. 2s. 1997, on the National Policy Guidelines for the Prevention and Management of Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs) was issued to be the basis for the provision of STD services at all levels of the health care system nationwide in order to decrease prevalence, complications, consequences and reduce the spread of HIV. As provided for in the order, the major policies include the following:

A. AIDS/STD prevention and control program shall be implemented in all levels of STD service facilities.
B. Acceptable, affordable and effective case management of patients with STD shall be made accessible to all individuals through the general health care system, whenever possible.
C. Syndromic Management shall be applied when and where reliable laboratory diagnostic support is not consistently available.
D. Designated referral sites with appropriate laboratory support to STD diagnosis shall be made available at least on a regional level.
E. The Department of Health in collaboration with the local government units shall ensure that doctors, nurses, midwives, pharmacists, and other health care workers, both hospital and community based, receive appropriate training on STD case management.

Implementing guidelines are hereby set to provide directions and instructions for STD case management at the different levels of health care system from tertiary hospitals down to the barangay health stations.


II. SPECIFIIC GUIDELINES / PROCEDURES

A. Primary Health Care Level: Non-Nursing and Non—Medical Personnel 

1. Considerations for Provision of Care/ Treatment 

a. The definition of care in this level is that which is given at the first encounter between health care worker and clients where physical examination of clients cannot be performed or waived but not inhibited and STD laboratory facilities are neither available nor feasible.
b. Care provided shall be limited to 4 syndromes namely, urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, genital ulceration and neonatal conjunctivitis. Priority for provision of management shall be focused on vaginal discharge and urethral discharge. 
c. Providers in this level shall not attempt management of complaints of testicular swelling and abdominal pain. Clients with these complaints shall be referred to the next higher level as soon as possible
d. Management of STD clients shall be under the supervision of a medical staff.
e. The main function at this level is to provide adequate STD information and education campaigns to improve symptom recognition of clients and prevent future risk taking behavior.

2. Area of Coverage / Recipient

a. Care at this level is appropriate in barangay health stations, rural health units and other facilities where primary health care is administered.
b. This is appropriate, where no local restrictions apply to care given as a result of a home visit or informal care given at pharmacies and other drug dispensing outlets. Care given in this instance may be a result of complaints by a client, an incidental finding by a provider or a result of risk assessment.

3. Minimum Professional Requirements. Care Provider Qualifications 
a. Personnel recommended to provide this level of care include midwives, trained barangay health workers, nurses without much expertise in examining clients with STD and other groups of individuals that the National AIDS/STD Prevention and Control Program per recommendation of the National STD Technical Committee shall find appropriate.

4. Training Requirement

a. Providers in this level likely to encounter clients with STD should be provided with training in the prevention and management of STD befitting their level of competency. As a minimum requirement, three days training in the prevention
and management of STD with instruction in the syndromic management of urethral discharge and vaginal discharge is recommended.

5. Referral Mechanism

a. Clients not responding to treatment at this level shall be referred to designated Social Hygiene Clinic, secondary health care level or referral center, where a laboratory is available to perform the basic laboratory tests to diagnose most STD.
b. Clients with lower abdominal pain or scrotal swelling shall be referred immediately to the secondary health care level.

6. Reporting system

a. Monthly reporting using the primary level reporting form (Annex A) shall be accomplished and submitted to the provincial / city STD coordinator within 5 days aﬂer the end of each month.

B. Primary Health Care Level: Nurses, Medical Officers, Trained Paramedical Officers

1. Considerations for Provision of Care/ Treatment

a. The definition of care in this level is that which is given at the first encounter between health care worker and clients where physical examination of clients including speculum and bimanual vaginal examination is possible but STD laboratory facilities are neither available nor feasible.
b. Care provided shall include all 6 syndromes namely, urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, genital ulceration, lower abdominal pain, scrotal swelling and neonatal conjunctivitis. Priority for provision of management shall be focused on vaginal discharge, urethral discharge and lower abdominal pain.
c. Some personnel such as midwives and paramedical staff shall be limited to provide care only in their ﬁeld of expertise and shall not manage clients with lower abdominal pain and scrotal swelling unless the supervision of an attending medical staff is available.

2. Area of Coverage / Recipient

a. Care at this level is appropriate in rural health units and other facilities where  primary health care is administered such as city and municipal health centers, and district hospitals.

b. This is appropriate, where no local restrictions apply to care given as a result of a home visit or informal care given at pharmacies and other drug dispensing outlets. Care given in this instance may be a result of complaints by a client, an incidental finding by a provider or result of risk assessment.

3. Minimum Professional Requirements / Care Provider Qualifications

a. Midwives, nurses with expertise in examining clients with STD; paramedical personnel trained to manage clients with STD and doctors of medicine. 

4. Training Requirement

a. Providers at this level likely to encounter clients with STD should be provided with training in the prevention and management of STD befitting their level of competency. As a minimum requirement, three days training in the prevention and management of STD with instruction in the syndromic management of  urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, lower abdominal pain, scrotal swelling, genital ulcer and neonatal conjunctivitis is recommended.

5. Referral Mechanism 

a. Clients not responding to treatment at this level shall be referred to designated Social Hygiene Clinic, secondary health care level or referral center, where a laboratory is available to perform the basic laboratory tests to diagnose most STD.

6. Reporting system

a. Monthly reporting using the primary level reporting form (Annex A) shall be accomplished and submitted to the provincial / city STD coordinator within 5 days after the end of each month.

C. STDS For Special Groups

1. Considerations for Provision of Care/ Treatment

a. The definition of care is that which is given at the first encounter between health care provider and client from a special population group such as commercial sex workers and other groups that from time to time the National AIDS/STD prevention and control program shall deem advisable to provide with special STD management. In this level the requirement for a physical examination of the client, including the use of speculum and bimanual vaginal examination is required. Simple STD laboratory facilities are usually available (gram staining, NSS and KOH preparation). This level usually performs simple STD laboratory diagnosis.
b. Care provided by personnel shall include simple STD laboratory diagnosis and all 6 syndromes namely, urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, lowers abdominal pain, scrotal swelling, genital ulcers and neonatal conjunctivitis.
c. Some personnel such as midwives and paramedical staff shall be limited to provide care only in their field of expertise and shall not manage clients with lower abdominal pain and scrotal swelling unless the supervision of an attending medical staff is available.
d. Certain Social Hygiene Clinics (Model Clinics) which have the capability of performing basic laboratory tests are designated secondary health care level or referral centers. Such clinics shall conduct STD prevalence studies, monitor patterns of STD and antimicrobial resistance; and risk assessment studies in special population to facilitate the development of area and population specific management protocols.

2. Area of Coverage / Recipient 

a. Care at this level is appropriate in Social Hygiene clinics and integrated STD clinics in city and municipal health offices.
b. Care given in this instance may be a result of complaints by a client, an incidental finding by a provider or as a result of mandatory casefinding and risk assessment of clients performed by the provider.

3. Minimum Professional Requirements/ Care Provider Qualifications

a. Personnel recommended to provide this level of care include specially trained midwives, nurses with expertise in examining clients with STD; paramedical personnel trained to manage clients with STD and doctors of medicine.

4. Training Requirement

a. Providers in this level likely to encounter clients with STD should be provided with training in the prevention and management of STD befitting their level of competency. As a minimum requirement, three days training in the prevention and management of STD with instruction in the syndromic management of urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, lower abdominal pain, scrotal swelling, genital ulcer and neonatal conjunctivitis is recommended.
b. Additional expert training in laboratory testing performed by the designated personnel shall be required.

5. Referral Mechanism 

a. Clients not responding to treatment at this level shall be referred to designated secondary health care level or referral center, where a laboratory is available to perform the basic laboratory tests to diagnose most STD.

6. Reporting system 

a. Monthly reporting using the secondary level reporting form (Annex B) shall be accomplished and submitted to the provincial / city STD coordinator.

D. secondary Health Care Level and Referral Centers

1. Considerations for Provision of Care/ Treatment

a. the definition of care is that which is given at the first encounter between health care provider and client and those referred from other health facilities for diagnosis and treatment support. In this level the requirement for a  physical examination of the client, including the use of speculum and bimanual vaginal examination when indicated is necessary. STD laboratory facilities are usually available such as gram staining, NSS and KOH  preparation, serologic test for syphilis and Neisseria Gonorrhea cultures. This level performs STD laboratory diagnosis.
b. Care provided by personnel shall include STD laboratory diagnosis and all 6 syndromes namely, urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, lower abdominal pain, scrotal swelling, genital ulcers and neonatal conjunctivitis.
c. Performs periodic studies for culture and sensitivity of Neisseria Gonorrhea to monitor effectiveness of treatment regimens. Conduct STD prevalence and special studies on STD.

2. Area of Coverage / Recipient

a. Care at this level is appropriate in Social Hygiene clinics, City, Municipal, District, Provincial or Regional hospitals
b. Ca1e given in this instance may be a result of complaints by a client, an incidental finding by a provider or as a result of mandatory casefinding and risk assessment of clients or a referral from other health care facilities.

3. Minimum Professional Requirements/ Care Provider Qualifications

a. Personnel recommended to provide this level of care include specially trained nurses with expertise in examining clients with STD and doctors of medicine.

4. Training Requirement 

a. Providers in this level likely to encounter clients with STD should be provided with training in the prevention and management of STD befitting their level of competency. As a minimum requirement, three days training in the prevention and management of STD with instruction in the syndromic management of urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, lower abdominal pain, scrotal swelling, genital ulcer and neonatal conjunctivitis is recommended.
b. Additional expert training in laboratory testing performed by the designated personnel shall be required.

5. Referral Mechanism

a. Clients not responding to treatment at this level shall be referred to designated tertiary health care level or referral center, where a laboratory is available to perform the laboratory tests to diagnose most STD.

6. Reporting system

a. Monthly reporting using the secondary level reporting form (Annex B) shall be accomplished and submitted to the provincial STD coordinator within 5 days after the end of each month who shall in turn submit reports to the regional STD coordinator or directly to the regional STD coordinator who then submits collated reports to the National AIDS/STD Prevention and Control Program 2 weeks after the end of each quarter.

E. Tertiary Level

1. Considerations for Provision of Care/ Treatment

The definition of care is that which is given at the first encounter between health care provider and client and those referred from other health facilities for specialized STD care for diagnosis, treatment and management of complications. May also manage STD clients at the primary and secondary level. This level performs STD laboratory diagnosis.
b. Care provided by personnel shall include STD laboratory diagnosis and all 6 syndromes namely, urethral discharge, vaginal discharge, lower abdominal pain, scrotal swelling, genital ulcers and neonatal conjunctivitis.
c. Performs periodic studies for culture and sensitivity of Neisseria Gonorrhea to monitor effectiveness of treatment regimens. Conduct STD prevalence and special studies on STD.

2. Area of Coverage / Recipient

a. Care at this level is appropriate in regional hospitals, medical centers and the STD /AIDS Central Cooperative laboratory (SACCL).
b. Care given in this instance may be a result of complaints by a client, an incidental finding by a provider or as a result of mandatory casefinding and risk assessment of clients or a referral from other health care facilities.
c. Care provided shall follow standard acceptable medical practice.

3. Minimum Professional Requirements/ Care Provider Qualifications

a. Personnel recommended to provide this level of care include licensed physicians and specially trained physicians or other staff under the supervision of licensed physicians

4. Training Requirement

a. Providers in this level likely to encounter clients with STD should be provided  with special training in the prevention and management of STD and its complications.
b. Additional expert training in laboratory testing performed by the designated personnel shall be required. 

5. Referral Mechanism

a. Clients not responding to treatment at this level shall be referred to the STD/AIDS Central Cooperative Laboratory (SACCL).

6. Reportigg system

a. Monthly reporting using the secondary/tertiary level reporting form (Annex B) shall be accomplished submitted within 5 days after the end of each month in the regional STD coordinator who then submits a collated quarterly report to the National AIDS/STD Prevention and Control Program 2 weeks after the end of each quarter.

F. Training on STD Case Management

1. Training for all health providers shall at the minimum be competency based.
2. Regional and provincial STD program coordinators and health manpower and development training (HMDTS) staffs shall undergo a training seminar from the national staff and other STD experts which include comprehensive training on National STD Case Management and STD program management.
3. Regional and provincial STD coordinators and HMDTS staffs shall be trainers to frontline health care workers.
4. Other trainers may be called from medical staff from the Social Hygiene Clinics, Provincial and Regional hospitals. 
5. A standardized training materials and modules (Manual for training in care and prevention of sexually transmitted diseases) which had been developed by the National AIDS/ STD prevention and control program shall be used.


III. ROLE/ NATURE OF DOH ASSISTANCE

A. Provide technically sound recommendations as the need arise to improve STD case management at all levels of health care.
B. Provide training of trainers on STD case management.
C. Develop standardized training modules and materials. 
D. Monitor and conduct evaluation of the quality of STD case management and training.
E. Augment financial support to the local government Unit or provide recommendations for the sustainability of activities for the provision of STD services at the local government units.
F. Advocate to policy makers, local government units the importance of providing adequate STD services to generate resources, sustain the implementation of activities and develop local policies that are consistent with national policies.
G. Coordinate the implementation of activities at the different levels of health care system to ensure proper utilization of limited resources, prevent duplications of functions and render adequate referral mechanism. 


IV. FUNDING

Provision of funding shall be the main responsibility of the local government unit however assistance may come from the National government or other donor agencies.


V. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

This order shall take effect on February 13,1998.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>