<date>07/31/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 4-B s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations for the use of funds appropriated under the General Appropriations Act specific to the line item: Subsidy for Indigent Patients who need specialized equipment not available in government hospitals.</subject>

<body> 

A. Background and Legal 'Basis

Specialized health care equipment have become increasingly expensive. They are usually not available in most government hospitals but can be found in several tertiary private medical centers. Accordingly, Congress appropriates funds through the annual General Appropriations Act (GAA) to subsidize and make available the use of such equipment for qualified indigent patients.

For instance, under GAA-FY97 Item # III.[Operations], c.[Health Facilities Maintenance and Operations], 4.[Hospital Operations], i.[Subsidy for indigent patients. . .] found on page 562, Congress appropriated the amount of P2,773,000 for this purpose.

A Special provision of GAA-FY97 further mandated that the release and use of this appropriation shall be based on rules and regulations recommended by the DOH, to wit:

GAA—FY1997 Special Provision #1, p.550: "Subsidy for Indigent Patients: The amount herein appropriated to cover the fees and charges for the utilization of specialized equipment in private hospitals or clinics which are not available in government hospitals shall be released and utilized in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be approved by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Secretary of Health. "

For the year 1998 and thereafter, the Department of Health, in compliance with the above GAA provision, has formulated these rules and regulations.

B. Purpose

This Administrative Order aims to ensure that the subsidy is managed efficiently, effectively, and equitably to ease the financial burden of indigent and disadvantaged patients who need but cannot afford to pay for the use of specialized medical equipment that are not available in government hospitals.

C. Coverage of the Subsidy

The subsidy covers indigent patients, specialized health care equipment, private hospitals or clinics having these equipment, and government hospitals identified, qualified, or authorized under the pertinent provisions of this Order.

D. Implementing Guidelines, Rules, Procedures

1. Eligibility of Patients

1.1. Only indigents who are admitted to a government hospital as inpatients and determined by hospital authorities to be actually indigent shall be eligible for the subsidy.

1.2. Based on Department Order No. 435B s. 1990, the term indigent, as used in this Order, shall refer to a person:

1.2.1. who has no visible income or means of support or whose income is not enough for the subsistence of his/her family, or

1.2.2. whose aggregate monthly family income is less than the latest NEDA subsistence threshold. [Note: The NEDA 1989 one-month food threshold for a family of six is P2, 524. The latest available figure should be used to determine indigence.]

1.3. Under exceptional circumstances, the following may also be deemed eligible after evaluation and qualification by the government hospital's Medical Social Service subject to the approval of the Chief-of-Hospital:

1.3.1. According to Personal Circumstances - a patient with no family, known relatives, or guardian; patients in crisis situations, esp. women, children, and elderly; patients who are physically disabled or differently-abled.

1.3.2. According to Community Situations - urban poor from squatter or slum areas; patients dislocated from their homes or communities due to armed conflict; patients from tribal or indigenous cultural communities; patients from disaster-stricken areas.

1.3.3. According to Nature of Illness - patients with chronic diseases needing long—term specialized treatment, e.g., cancer, kidney disorders, heart or lung ailments, etc.

1.4. Patients who are fully covered by private health insurance or third-party accident insurance at the time of illness or injury are generally not eligible.

1.5. Outpatients shall not be covered by the subsidy.

1.6. The Medical Social Service of the government hospital shall evaluate and classify patients based on the foregoing criteria and shall prepare a brief case study to be attached to the attending physician's clinical abstract.

2. Qualification of Government Hospitals

2.1. All government hospitals retained by or reverted to the Department of Health shall be qualified to participate in the subsidy program.

2.2. Hospitals devolved to LGUs shall be allowed to use specialized equipment of qualified private hospitals that is not available to the nearest retained hospital and avail of the subsidy for indigent patients under the terms and conditions of a tripartite agreement to be executed among (a) the devolved hospital through the concerned LGU, (b) DOH through the Regional Field Office, and (c) the private hospital. Such agreements shall be subject to review by HOMS and LGAMS and to final approval by the Secretary of Health. In addition,the devolved hospital should secure a certification that the said equipment is not available to the nearest retained hospital.

3. Participation of Private Hospitals or Clinics

3.1. Private hospitals or clinics that have the necessary specialized equipment and are willing to give discounts on the rates/charges for the use of such equipment may participate in the subsidy program.

3.2; A formal contract or memorandum of agreement to be executed between the authorized government hospital and the private hospital and to be approved by the Secretary of Health shall govern the use of the subsidy.

4. Use of Specialized Equipment

4.1. Only specialized diagnostic or therapeutic equipment not available in government hospitals and considered extremely necessary in the diagnosis or treatment of eligible patients shall be used for this program.

4.2. These may include CAT-Scan, MRI, ABG, Ultrasound, X—ray, Cobalt, and other radiological,laboratory and technical machines.

4.3. The attending physician shall determine the validity or justify the necessity of using a particular specialized equipment for the examination or treatment of the patient and shall prepare and submit to the Chief-of—Hospital a clinical abstract that includes such justification.

4.4. The Chief—of—Hospital shall approve (or disapprove) the use of specialized equipment based on the evaluation of Medical Social Service and the attending physician's abstract, justification, or recommendation.

5. Contract Between Government and Private Hospitals

5.1. Qualified government hospitals are authorized to negotiate and enter into a contract with private hospitals for the use of specialized health care equipment subject to the approval of the Secretary of Health.

5.2. The Director or Chief of the concerned government hospital shall cause the preparation of such a contract and endorse this to the OSEC for approval.

5.3. As a prerequisite for approval, the contract shall provide that the private hospital shall grant reasonable discounts based on the prevailing rates or charges for the use of its specialized equipment.

6. Sub—allotment, Disbursement, and Utilization of the Subsidy

6.1. At the start of each calendar year, the Director or Chief-of—Hospital of the concerned government hospital shall submit to the OSEC for appropriate action and for sub-allotment purposes the list of private hospitals with which contracts have been made, their locations, and their specialized equipment to be used.

6.2. Requests for sub-allotments shall be made by the Directors or Chiefs of qualified government hospitals. Such requests shall be coursed through the concerned Regional Field Office Director, who shall endorse these to the OSEC for action.

6.3. Based on the approved lists of contracted private hospitals and the existing guidelines, procedures, and criteria for sub-allotment, the DOH through the Budget Division of the Office for Management Services (OMS) shall sub-allot the subsidy to all qualified government hospitals.

6.4. The total of these sub-allotments shall not exceed the total amount appropriated under the GAA for the particular fiscal year.

6.5. Subsidy funds remaining after the sub-allotments to the retained or reverted government hospitals may be used for devolved hospitals as provided for under Item # D.2.2. of this Order or as may be allowed by government accounting and auditing regulations.

6.6. The bill of expenses for the use of their specialized equipment shall be submitted by the private hospital to the concerned government hospital on a monthly basis.

6.7. When advanced arrangements for the use of specialized equipment are made as a matter of necessity, the government hospital may obligate a portion of the sub-allotment in favor of the private hospital or deposit a portion with an
authorized government depository bank to ensure the availability of funds and expedite the settlement of bills.

6.8. At the end of each year, the Director or Chief of Hospital shall submit a liquidation report on how the fund was used to the Finance Division, Office of Management Services, DOH Central Office.

7. Monitoring

The DOH, through the Office of Hospital Facilities Services (OHFS) and the Office of Management Services, shall monitor the management and utilization of the subsidy to identify weaknesses and gaps in implementation and shall recommend remedial measures to improve the implementation of this Order.

E. Repealing Clause

Provisions of existing administrative issuances, guidelines, or regulations inconsistent with this Order are repealed, superseded, or modiﬁed accordingly.

F. Effectivity Clause

This Administrative Order takes effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in two (2) national newspapers of general circulation.

</body> 
<sign>FELIPE A. ESTRELLA ,JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


HOMS/HPDS