 
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>04/24/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 16 s, 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 7799 “An act establishing a District Hospital in the Municipal of Talisay, Province of Cebu to be known as the Talisay District Hospital, and appropriating funds therefor”.</subject>

<body>

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 7799, passed by the Senate and the House of Representative and approved by His Excellency, Pres. Fidel V. Ramos on August 26, 1994, in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution, the following Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted.


Section 1. Title:

These rules shall be known as the implementing rules and regulations of Republic Act No. 7799 “An act establishing a District Hospital in the Municipality of Talisay, Province of Cebu to be known as the Talisay District Hospital and appropriating funds therefor”.


Section 2. Purpose: 

These rules and regulations are adopted prescribing the guidelines procedures for the implementation of RA 7799 to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the objective thereof.


Section 3. Scope:

These rules shall apply to the Talisay District Hospital in the municipality of Talisay, Province of Cebu.

     
Section 4. Acronyms: 

The following are the different acronyms that will be used in the implementing rules and regulations and/or the accompanying annexes or documents: 

CO 	- Capital Outlay
DBM 	- Department of Budget and Management 
DOH 	- Department of Health
HOMS 	- Hospital Operations and Management Service
INFRA 	- Health Infrastructure Service 
MOOE 	- Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses
OHFSR 	- Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation
PHO 	- Provincial Health Office
PS 	— Personnel Service


Section 5. Implementing Guidelines:

A. Standard Requirements: 

1. The following standard requirements shall be presided by the HOMS and INRA for the Talisay District Hospital:

1.1 Standard Manpower Requirement as per hospital bed capacity and category;
1.2 Standard Equipment and Instruments as per hospital bed capacity and category;
1.3 Standard hospital site and infrastructure plans as per hospital bed capacity and category; and
1.4 Standard PS, MOOE and CO budget estimate as per hospital bed capacity and category. 

B. Administrative Procedures:

1. On the basis of the DOH hospital standards the HOMS shall prepare the Talisay District Hospital’s requirement and budgetary estimates, taking into consideration the said hospital’s proposed category, bed capacity, standard staffing, equipment, and MOOE relative to its establishment.

2. The Health Infrastructure Service (INFRA), on the basis of DOH hospital standards, shall prepare the Talisay District Hospital’s non- infrastructure requirement and budgetary estimate, as per proposed hospital bed capacity and submit said requirements to the Hospital operations and Management Service (HOMS) Within fifteen (15) days from receipt thereof.

3. The Hospital Operations and Management Service (HOMS) shall, evaluate, prepare and consolidate the budgetary estimates of the Talisay District Hospital in terms of standards PS, MOOE and CO requirement. 

4. The Hospital Operations and Management Service (HOMS) shall send a copy of the consolidated standard requirements to the Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation (OHFSR) for their final evaluation, comments and/or approval.

5. Any changes/revisions in the budgetary requirements must follow steps 1 to 4.

6. Upon approval by the Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation (OHFSR), the requirements in terms of standard PS, MOOE and CO shall be sent to the Governor of the Province, concerned, for inclusion in the said LGU’s annual budget. A copy shall also be sent to the PHO concerned. 


Section 6. Effectivity Clause:

This administrative Order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA N. REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO I</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
