Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>05/25/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 19 s., 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the utilization, disbursement and reporting of the 1998 DOH Assistance to Local Government Units (ALGU) Funds to partially cover Magna Carta Benefits of devolved health workers.</subject>

<body>

Inadequacy of funds has been the basic problem in the implementation of devolved health services. It resulted in non-payment of Magna Carta for Public Health Workers and Salary Standardization of devolved health workers.

In response to this national issue the Department of Health, through the 1997 General Appropriations Act provides for the granting of P69 M DOH Assistance to Local Government Units (ALGU) to partially subsidize the  implementation of RA 7305 (Magna Carta Benefits for the Public Health Workers) specifically for devolved DOH personnel.

The ALGU shall be based on current implementation level of RA 7305 and allocated according to Devolution Financing Burden (DFB) Ratio of LGUs as calculated by DOH and DBM. Under the DFB Ratio scheme, LGUs categorized as needing assistance shall be granted priority in the allocation of augmentation funds.

In this respect, the following guidelines shall govern the utilization, disbursement and reporting of these funds namely:


A.) Benefits Covered Under this subsidy

The specific benefits and amounts to be covered are as follows:

a) subsistence allowances
b) laundry allowance 
c) salary differentials of Rural Health Physicians (RHPs)
d) RATA of RHPs 


B.) Computation of Subsidy (See Annex 1)


C.) Utilization of Funds: 

1. Devolved health workers detailed or transferred to other areas shall claim the amount provided for in their respective mother units. Hence, total number of devolved health workers shall be based on organization Staffing and Classificatlon Actual Summary (OSCAS).

2. LGUs that have already paid the full magma carta benefits authonzed by DOH shall instead use the subsidy to cover other benefits such as Salary standardization, other health workers benefits and local priority health programs. The DIRFO may issue a clearance/authorization for the LGU to utilize the fund for the aforecited reasons other than the payment of Magna Carta benefits provided that the LGU certifies that all Magna Carta benefits have been paid.

3. Newly hired personnel occupying devolved positions shall be entitled to all benefits stipulated in this guidelines.


D.) Funds Flow

1. The Department of Budget and Management shall issue a Notice of Cash Allocation (NCA) to the Department of Health.

2. The Department of Health shall sub-allot funds to the DOH-Integrated Regional Field Office (DIRFO) equivalent to the funding requirement of all LGUs under their concern as reflected in an allocation list to be provided by the Central Office.

3. DIRFOS shall issue funding checks to the current account of recipient LGUs; a Memorandum of Agreement shall be Signed between the DIRFO and the Local Chief Executive defining each party’s responsibilities in the disbursement and utilization of these funds.

4. DOH Representatives to the Local Health Board of the recipient LGUs shall deliver the funding checks to the Local Chief Executives concerned during their LHB meetings.


E.) Reporting of Utilization of Funds

1. Copies of proofs of receipt by concerned devolved health workers shall be provided to the DIRFOs by the respective Local Government Units.

2. DOH Representatives to the Local Health Board or other designated personnel shall monitor the utilization this subsidy.

3. DIRFOS are required to monitor the utilization and consolidated reports shall be provided for by DIRFOS within six-months (6) from the release of the subsidy as agreed upon in the Memorandum of Agreement with recipient LGUs.


F.) Comprehensive Health Care Agreement (CHCA) as the covering MOA

1. The CHCA defines the responsibilities of both DOH and recipient LGUs.

2. Funding checks shall be released to the Local Government Units concerned upon concurrence to the guidelines Local Chief Executive concerned.

3. In the event that the Local Government Units will not agree to these guidelines, the DIRFO shall release the subsidy directly to devolved health workers through payroll.

All disbursement of funds shall be subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

 
</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO I</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
