Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Telephone Nos: 743-83-01 to 23

<date>12/21/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 26-A s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Implementation Arrangement for the Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project (WHSMP)</subject>

<body> 

I. Rationale:

In line with the DOH vision of full participation off Filipino Women in decision making on their health and their full access to health services from competent, caring, communicative and gender sensitive health care givers, the
implementing arrangements for the WHSMP as contained in Administrative Order No. 9, s. 1996 need to be revised. The major change is the creation of a Women’s Health and Development Program (WHDP) which main goal is to integrate the Women’s perspective in all health programs and services and at all levels of the health care delivery system. Relative to the WHSMP, the WHDP is tasked to provide a sound technical basis to the Project and ensure its institutionalization and sustainability especially after project life.



II. Objectives:

The objectives of the revised implementation arrangement of the WHSMP are as follows:
1. To identify administrative accountability for project components at various levels of the DOH (central, regional, local)
2. To empower the Regional Directors to supervise and administer project resources in their areas of responsibility
3. To organize project technical interventions under a comprehensive public health program.
4. To create mechanisms to address backlog issues
5. To ensure Project sustainability
6. To foster transparency
7. To unload the PMO of technical functions, to allow focus on administrative needs of the Project 
8. To create opportunities for greater participation of organized women  groups through the cluster for Gender and Development



III. Organizational Structure 

The organizational structure relative to the revised implementation arrangement of the WHSMP is shown in Annex A. The Terms of Reference of the various components, offices, designated personnel in the organizational structure are as follows:
1. Project Steering Committee

a. To provide overall policy guidance for project implementation.
b. To establish accountability for the quality completion of project.
c. To make recommendations to improve implementation
d. To recommend to the Secretary of Health national health policies as offshoots of the project.
e. To review and approve policy guidelines for:
* Project life implementation plan
* Annual operational plan and budget
* Midterm project reviews 
* Final project evaluation 
f. To review periodic assessment of project until its completion and recommend measures to ensure sustainability
g. To raise policies and operational concerns of the respective agencies represented in the committee arising from implementation
h. To approve research agenda of the project.

2. Project Director for Administration

Assures responsibility for the administrative aspect of Project Management which includes interalia procurement (drugs and medicines, goods, office supplies and equipment, technical assistance, etc.), recruitment (office personnel and consultants), contract and financial management.

3. Project Director for plans and programs
Assumes responsibility for the technical aspect of the project in particular ensuring the technical soundness of the strategies, plans, and programs to be carried out to attain Project objectives 

4. Women’ s Health and Development Program
Assumes responsibility for coordinating the technical key players and organizing Project technical interventions ensuring that it fits into the overall comprehensive public health Program of the DOH. Likewise it shall supervise technical programs and technical assistance to the same at the central office. It shall be liaison to the Office for Public Health Services and shall coordinate with the Office for Health Facilities. 

a. Program cluster for technical services
* assumes responsibility for the development of plans and strategies relative to the maternal care, Reproductive Tract Infection (RTI) and cervical cancer control component of Project

b. Program cluster for gender and development
* assumes responsibility for ensuring integration of the gender perspective into all technical and support components of the Project (IEC, Social Marketing, etc.)

5. The Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project Management Office is responsible for the day to day administration of the Project, for monitoring its performance and evaluating its results. The Project Management Unit
of the Partnership component (EU financed) and the team of the Training component (AusAid financed) are responsible for the day to day administration of these components and shall report to the WHSMP-PMO.
The PMO shall likewise be responsible for coordination and communication with donors and for coordination with the Office for Standards and Regulations.
a. Project Coordinator for finance — assumes responsibility for monitoring of releases and disbursements of project funds.
b. Project Coordinator for personnel/technical services — assumes responsibility for monitoring performance of project management personnel, technical assistances/consultants.
c. Project Coordinator for Procurement — assumes responsibility for monitoring of procurement of goods and services financed by the project both at the National and Regional levels.

The above components/units shall constitute the Project Executive Committee.

6. Regional Director — the Regional Directors are designated as Project Deputy Directors and their Terms of Reference are as follows:

a. Supervision of the implementation civil works in the provinces under their areas of responsibility (civil works engineer/team)
b. Undertakes procurement of Project goods/equipment (Regional bids and awards committee)
c. Manages the Logistic System in their respective areas of responsibility (Regional Logistics Units)
d. Supervision/monitoring of Regional implementation of the various project components — partnership component, training component including the deputization of training partners, quality assurance, RTI, Cervical Cancer Control, IEC, Research. (Public Health Program Coordinator/Hospital Coordinators)
e. Provision of technical assistance in the planning of various project components 
f. Coordination with LGU’s and other local partners (Regional LGAMS).
g. Management of Regional contracts and finances (Regional Admin./finance)
The Deputy Project Directors and Project Executive Committee constitutes the National Project team.

7. The Local Government Health Systems are responsible for project implementation at the local levels in accordance with the Project Implementation Agreements (PIA).



IV. Coordination Schemes

The following meetings shall be held regularly to ensure effectiveness of the systems and procedures put in place relative to this revised implementation arrangement.
1. Monthly technical cluster Reviews.
2. Monthly executive committee meetings (admin./ﬁnance)
3. Quarterly meetings of Deputy Directors. 
The above shall be called and conducted by the WHDP with the WHSMP-PMO acting as Head of Secretariat for the same.


V. All other provisions of AO No. 9, s. 1996 not inconsistent with this issuance shall remain in effect.

This Administrative Order shall be effective on December 14,1998.

 
</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
