Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>10/06/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 18-A s.1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guideline on the utilization of GOP Funds for the conduct of a 3-day live—in Mindanao Health Education Conference-Workshop in Region 13, Butuan City on December, 1998.</subject>

<body>

There will be a 3-day live-in Mindanao Health Education Conference Workshop in Region 13, Butuan City on December, 1998. The objectives of this conference-workshop will be centered on the following: 1. Come-up with an integrated Communication Plan for the nine (9) Services/Offices under the Office for Public Health Services (OPHS) namely: Tuberculosis Control Service (TBCS), Nutrition Service (NS), Environmental Health Service (EHS), Malaria Control Service (MCS), Dental Health Service (DHS), Schistosomiasis Control Service (SCS), Family Planning Service (FPS), Non-Communicable Disease Control Service (NCDCS), and AIDS-STD Program; and 2. Discuss and develop appropriate strategies and activities that will accelerate the implementation of the nine (9) public health programs in the Mindanao Area.

The meeting will also serve as a venue for consultations with Governors and Mayors, National, Regional, and Field Program Managers and Implementors on matters concerning program policies, strategies, and other issues of national concern.

1. The Nine (9) Services/Units under the Oﬂ'ice for Public Health Services (OPHS) that are involved in this conference workshop will contribute the amount of Fifty Thousand (P50,000.00) Pesos each for a total amount of Four Hundred Fifty Thousand (P450,000.00) Pesos to cover the expenses in the implementation of this particular activity. The individual concerned Service/Office will have to charge this amount from their MODE Expense Class 200-17 (Training) or 200-29 (Other Services) whichever fund is available.

2. The total amount of P450,000.00 pooled together from the funds of the aforementioned Services/Offices will be sub-allotted to the DOH Regional Field Office No. 13 (CARAGA Region), Butuan City before the commence of the Conference-Workshop.

3. The participants to this 3-day live-in Conference-Workshop will be composed of the following:

3.1 Regional Health Directors of Region 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and ARMM Health Secretary
3.2 Service Directors of Program Manager of TBCS, NS, EHS, MCS, DHS, SCS, FPS, NCDCS and AIDS-STD Program.
3.3 Governors (Mindanao Area)
3.4 Selected Cit/Municipal Mayors (Mindanao Area)
3.5 Representatives ﬁcm the Mindanao Area for the following:
- Department of Education Culture and Sports (DECS)
- Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
- Department of Agriculture (DA) 
- National Irrigation Administration (NIA)
3.6 Selected Non-Government Organization (NGO) representatives from the Mindanao Area
3.7 Selected representatives from local and national funding agencies
3.8 Selected Technical Staffs of the participating Programs and DOH Regional Field Offices. 
3.9 Secretariat

4. The Regional Health Director of DOH Regional Field Office No.13, Butuan City together with the Directors of the involved Services/Offices will reconstitute a Conference-Workshop Committee which will do all the planning and scheduling of activities while the execution and implementation of the Conference-Workshop will be by the DOH Regional Field Office No. 13.

5. The DOH Regional Filed Office No.13 Director will be responsible for the selection of participants (2.3 to 2.9) coming from the Mindanao Area.

6. The funds for the live—in Conference-Workshop will cover expenses food and lodging (this could be contracted out), supplies and materials, gasoline expenses, rental for the use of conference hall and audio-visual equipment, and other incidental expenses incurred during the Conference-Workshop.

7. Utilization of the funds shall follow the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

8. In the event that part of the Conference-Workshop fund will not be utilized after the workshop, the unused amount will be programmed for other priority activities of the DOH Regional Field Office No. 13, Butuan City.

For strict compliance.


</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

OPHS/SCS/AO1