Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila 
Telephone No: 743-83-01 to 23 loc. 1125-1131

<date>10/25/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 20-A s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Transfer of Authority from the Department of Health to the Municipality of Culion.</subject>

<body>

Since 1917, the Department of Health (DOH) has exercised administrative control over the Culion reservation which was established in 1904. For several decades, the Department has been the governing authority over the said reservation. On February, 19, 1992, however, Congress passed Republic Act No. 7193, creating the municipality of Culion. The territorial area of the new municipality is exactly the same as the area constituting the Culion reservation. The municipality is now governed by a complete set of government officials.

In view of the creation of the municipality of Culion and pursuant to the principles of decentralization and devolution mandated by the Local Government Code of 1991, all administrative powers previously exercised by the Department through the Chief of the Culion Sanitarium over the Culion reservation should be deemed withdrawn and transferred to the municipality. As a duly created Local Government Unit, the municipality should be able to  exercise all powers granted it by law, specifically by the local government Code of 1991. The Department’s authority should now be limited and be concentrated on the operations of the Culion hospital within the municipality.

In view of these, the Culion Sanitarium is hereby directed to do the following:

1. Stop any issuance of permit for the gathering and or transfer of lumber and the use of  its water, land and for Pearl Farm operation, including any expansion thereto;

2. Prevent further issuance and transfer of permits/rights for the occupation issued for  the development of land within or inbound island (Main land) and the other smaller islands and its natural reservation for lepers under Executive Order No. 35;

3. Negotiate with the LGU of Culion in the formulation of land use and zoning ordinance; the hospital zone shall not include tribal lands and lands devoted to commercial, institutional or residential establishment;

4. Turn over all records pertaining to awarding/granting/leasing of lands and coastal marine areas for occupation, development or for other purposes, to the Municipality;

5. Allow the LGU of Culion to use real estate properties necessary for the establishment of LGU site, offices, and facilities without any financial consideration, including the Patag Airstrip;

6. Allow the LGU to use the buildings, namely Construction and Supply, Supply (Yellow) Building, Obras Building, Administration Building, Bachelor’s Quarter, Female Nurses Home, Bayanihan Theater and Libis Gate and the Huber (Road) Grader without any monetary consideration, until such time that authorization from the Office of the President has been approved for their transfer;

7. Negotiate with the LGU subject for the final approval of the DOH on the proposed transfer of management of the water system in former Colony Proper, Jardin, Cubango, Balala and Bucal;

8. Assign to the municipality all rights of the Department as Lessor of the municipal waters, such as used for Pearl Farm operations, among others, including but not limited to, the right to collect rentals and/or fees from the pearl farm operator for the use of the municipal waters. Likewise, pearl farm rentals collected for 1998 be turned-over to the municipality, 30% to be programmed by the LGU health board, of which Culion Sanitarium is a member, for health needs;

9. Recognize the functions of the LGU that are given to Local government Units under the Local Government Code of 1991;

10. Perform any other act to ensure the performance of the above mentioned order.

The Chief of the Culion Sanitarium is further directed to submit a report detailing the Sanitarium compliance with this Administrative Order within thirty (30) days from receipt of this order.


</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR. M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>