Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila 
Telephone No: 743-83-01 to 23 loc. 1125-1131

<date>09/21/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 16 s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Delegation Of Authority for Certain Transactions within the Department of Health</subject>

<body>

In order to streamline operations and fast-track action on official documents and communications, delegation of authority from the Secretary of Health to certain officials within the Department of Health is hereby prescribed. This delegation is in accordance with the framework of Executive Order 119, other executive orders as well as the General Accounting and Auditing Manual. Further, this repeals pertinent portions of Administrative Order (AO) 40—A s. 1996 on Delegation of Authority for Central Office and A0 32 s. 1992 on Administrative Issuances.

Officials and employees shall therefore be guided by the following:



I. Transactions for approval of the Secretary:


A. Personnel transactions:
1. Officials/Employees covered:
1.1. Undersecretaries, Assistant Secretaries and Bureau Directors
1.2. Regional Directors
1.3. Chiefs of National Medical Centers, Special Research Centers and Hospitals
1.4. Staff of the Office of the Secretary (OSEC) proper

2. Personnel Transactions anent officials/employees named under I.A.1.
2.1. Original, promotional, contractual and co-terminous appointments and reinstatements to positions including recommendation of candidates for appointment to CESO position by the President
2.2. Decisions on protested appointments
2.3. Designation of Officer-in-Charge (OIC) in the absence of officials mentioned under A.1. (1.1.—1.3). Also, designation of OIC in the absence of Service Directors and Division Chiefs for more than 30 working days
2.4. Temporary detail to other executive agencies
2.5. Reassignment from one major Office to another
2.6. Decisions of administrative cases involving penalty of removal from the service or fine or suspension of 30 days or more
2.7. Formal investigation findings and recommendations on administrative complaints
2.8. Application for sick, vacation, maternity, terminal and special privilege leaves including commutation of money value
2.9. Application for retirement
2.10. Secondment to other agencies including all other personnel
2.11. Request for transfer to another service or other agencies
2.12. Resignation
2.13. Dropping from the rolls of service
2.14. Extension of services for 6 months after compulsory retirement.

It shall be noted that all other personnel transactions such as applications for leave relating to the staff of the OSEC proper shall be acted upon by /approved by the Head Executive Assistant.


B. Other transactions :

1. Communications to secretaries or heads of other national government agencies and to the President
2. All administrative orders (ie. issuances which provide policies, standards and rules and regulations)
3. Department orders authorizing/approving
(a) personnel to render overtime services with payment of additional compensation computed on an hourly basis for all personnel in the central office
(b) local travel for more than 7 calendars days but not more than 1 calendar month including all other personnel
(c) foreign travel for all personnel
4. Individual consultancy service contracts for the Office of the Secretary proper
5. Notices of award
4.1. thru public or simplified bidding in the central office involving amounts P10 million and below P 50 million
4.2. thru negotiated and emergency purchase involving amounts of P2 million and more which are countersigned by at least two (2) undersecretaries, namely Chief of Staff and Undersecretary concerned
5. Purchase orders, contracts, letters and job orders resulting from public bidding in the central office, involving amounts of P10
million and above and which shall be countersigned by at least two (2) undersecretaries, namely Chief of Staff and Undersecretary concerned
6. Disbursement vouchers (Box C) for central office major transactions which have ceilings corresponding to 4 and 5 above.
7. Countersigning of checks amounting to P10 million and above
8. Agency Budget Estimate or DOH Budget Proposal
9. Request for release of Congressional initiatives,Agency initiatives and funds needing clearance of authorities concerned
10. Request for budget modiﬁcation and realignment by Offices and Services for consideration by the Dept of Budget and Management



II. Transactions for approval of the Chief of Staff :


A. Personnel transactions:

1. Officials/employees covered
1.1. Staff of the Office of the Secretary (OSEC) proper
1.2. Staff of the Office of the Chief of Staff proper and Service Directors under the OCS
1.3. Doctors to the Barrios
1.4. All other personnel of DOH as indicated

2. Personnel transactions anent DOH officials and employees under II.A.1.
2.1. Original, promotional, contractual and co-terminous appointments and reinstatement to positions
2.2. Certification of entrance to duty and oath of office for all personnel including those mentioned under I.A.1. 
2.3. Notice of salary adjustment/salary increases for all personnel including those mentioned under I.A.1
2.4. Decisions on protested appointments
2.5. Decisions on administrative cases
2.6. Permission to teach, exercise profession or engage in business outside office hours
2.7. Application for sick, vacation, other leaves for 30 working days and more, including commutation of money value
2.8. Designation of officer-in-charge in the absence of Service Directors under OCS for 30 working days or less
2.9. Temporary detail for a period exceeding 90 days, including all other personnel not mentioned under I.A.1
2.10. Reassignment from one major Office to another, including all other personnel not mentioned under I.A.1
2.11. Decisions on formal investigation findings and recommendations on administrative complaints, including all other personnel not mentioned under I.A.1
2.12. Application for retirement
2.13. Resignation
2.14. Request for transfer to another service or other agencies
2.15 Dropping from the rolls of service
2.16 Extension of services for six (6) months after compulsory retirement


B. Other transactions

1. Communications to regional health offices, retained hospitals, other executive departments, legislative offices, foreign government or organizations which are policy determining, confidential or have significant implications on national health policies
2. Designation of special disbursing officers for all services under OCS
3. All department orders authorizing/approving
(a) creation of committees/groups to perform specific assignments involving several Offices, regional offices or specialty hospitals
(b) conduct of /attendance to inter-office conferences, seminars
(c) official local travel of less than 7 days for all personnel

4. All department circulars
5. All department memoranda
5. Request for organizational staffing modiﬁcation
6. Individual consultancy service contracts for the Office of the Chief of Staff proper
7. Notices of award emanating from the OCS and Services under OCS
7.1 Public/simplified bidding of amounts P2 million and more but less than P10 million
7.2. Notices of award thru negotiated and emergency purchase involving amounts P500,000 to below P2 million
8. Purchase orders. contracts, letters and job orders as a result of public bidding in the central office involving items under ll.B.7.
9. Disbursement Voucher (BoxC) for central office transactions which
have ceilings corresponding to II.B.7.
10. Purely consultancy contracts relating to infrastructure projects, regardless of amount
11. Countersigning of checks amounting to P5 million up to P10million
12. Delegation of authority to heads of offices covered under II.A.1 related to matters or transactions not covered by this administrative order and not contrary to existing administrative and accounting rules and regulations



III. Transactions for approval of all other Undersecretaries of Health :

A. Personnel transactions:

1.. Officials/employees covered
1.1. Staff of the Office proper and Service Directors under it
1.2. Medical pool (Undersecretary of Office for Hospitals and Facilities Service -OHFS )
2. Personnel transactions anent DOH officials and employees under III.A.1
2.1. Original, promotional, contractual and co-terminous appointments and reinstatement to positions
2.2. Decisions on protested appointments
2.3. Decisions on administrative cases
2.4. Permission to teach, exercise profession or engage in business outside office hours
2.5. Application for sick, vacation, other leaves for 30 working days and more, including commutation of money value
2.6. Designation of officer-in—charge in the absence of Service Directors for less than 30 calendar days
2.7. Temporary detail for a period not exceeding 90 days
2.8. Reassignment from one Service/Unit to another Service or Unit within the Office
2.9. Application for retirement
2.10. Resignation
2.11. Request for transfer to another service or other agencies
2.12. Dropping from the rolls of service
2.13. Extension of services for six (6) months after compulsory retirement


B. Other transactions

1. All office orders authorizing/approving
a. Creation of committees/groups to perform specific assignments involving several Services under their Office
b. official local travel (duration of less than 7 days) of their staff to conferences, seminars and non-degree training programs
c. Designation of Special Disbursing Officers for all Services/Units under it
2. Individual consultancy contracts for the Office proper and Services/units under it.
3. Notices of award emanating from the respective Offices and Services under it thru
3.1.Public/simplified bidding of amounts P2 million and more but less than P10 million
3.2. Notices of award thru negotiated and emergency purchase involving amounts P500,000 to below P2 million
4. Purchase orders. contracts, letters and job orders as a result of public bidding in the central office involving items under III.B.3.
5. Disbursement Voucher (Box C) for central office transactions with ceilings corresponding to III.B.3.
6. Delegation of authority to heads of offices covered under III.A.1 related to matters or transactions not covered by this
administrative order and not contrary to existing administrative and accounting rules and regulations

It shall be noted that approval of transactions for the following personnel shall be guided by these provisions:

1. division chiefs and staff of the central office shall be delegated to their respective service directors unless otherwise ordered;
2. staff and equivalent chief of division in regional offices and Chief of regional medical centers, regional hospitals shall be delegated to the regional directors (Per EO 119); and
3. equivalent chief of division in DOH hospitals shall be delegated to the chiefs of hospitals.



IV. For approval by the OMS Undersecretary:

In addition to the transactions indicated under III for all other Undersecretaries, the OMS Undersecretary shall approve the following:

1. Claims for benefits under Sec. 699 of the revised Administrative Code of 1987
2. Clearance Certificate for all employees
3. Countersigning of checks amounting to P2 million to P5million.

All related issuances and other orders inconsistent with this Order are hereby rescinded.

This Order takes effect immediately .

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ,MD,MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
