<date>11/12/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 22 s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Guidelines for Delegation of Authority and Definition of Responsibility for Certain Transactions within the Department of Health</subject>

<body>

In order to streamline operations and fast-track action on official documents and communications, delegation of authority from the Secretary of Health to certain officials within the Department of Health is hereby prescribed. This delegation is in accordance with the framework of Executive Order 119, other executive orders and the General Accounting and Auditing Manual. Further, this Order repeals Administrative Order (AO) No. 16, s. 1998 and other pertinent provisions of AO 40-A s. 1996 on Delegation of Authority for Central Office and AO 32 s. 1994 on Administrative Issuances.

Officials and employees shall therefore be guided by the following:



I. Transactions for the Secretary:


A. Approval of personnel transactions:

1. For the Undersecretaries, Regional Directors, other officials as specified and, for Staff of the OSEC proper

1.1. Original, promotional, contractual and co-terminous appointments with the Secretary; reemployment/reinstatements to positions including  recommendation of candidates for appointment to CESO positions by the President. 

(CESO positions shall include Undersecretaries, Assistant Secretaries, Regional Directors, Assistant Regional Directors, Chiefs of Specialty and Special Hospitals, Chiefs of Regional Hospitals and Medical Centers, Sanitaria, Retained District Hospitals and Research Hospitals including renationalized hospitals, Bureau Directors and Service Directors)

1.2. Certification of entrance to duty and oath of office
1.3. Notice of salary adjustment and salary increases
1.4. Designation of Officer-in-Charge (OIC) in the absence of Undersecretaries and Regional Directors.
1.5. Designation of OIC to positions in the absence of Bureau/Service Directors and Division Chiefs for more than 1 calendar month with entitlement to Representation and Transportation Allowance (RATA).
1.6. Reassignment from one major Office to another to include all CESO positions
1.7. Application for sick, vacation, maternity, terminal and special privilege leaves including commutation of money value
1.8. Permission to teach, exercise profession or engage in business outside office hours
1.9. Application for retirement
1.10. Request for transfer to another service or other agencies
1.11. Acceptance of resignation

Other personnel transactions such as applications for leave of absence relating to the OSEC proper staff shall be acted upon by /approved by the Head Executive Assistant.

2. For Hospital Officials/ Personnel

2.1. Original, promotional and reemployment/reinstatements to positions for
a) Division Heads, Medical Specialist I-IV of Specialty and Special Hospitals and other Metro Manila Hospitals excluding district hospitals under the National Capital Region upon the recommendation of the Office for Hospitals and Facilities Services

b) Division Heads or its equivalent, Medical Specialist I-IV of Regional Hospitals and Medical Centers and other DOH/Renationalized Hospitals outside Metro Manila upon the recommendation of the Regional Health Office

3. For all Personnel

3.1. Decisions on protested appointments upon the recommendation of the Committee on Evaluation and Protest
3.2. Decisions on administrative cases involving penalty of preventive suspension upon recommendation of the Fact Finding Committee
3.3. Decision on administrative cases involving dismissal from service upon recommendation of the Office for Legal Affairs
3.4. Temporary detail to other departments and other government agencies
3.5. Secondment for 1 year or less (supported by a Memorandum of Agreement) for all personnel upon the recommendation of the Undersecretary
3.6. Dropping from the rolls of service
3.7. Extension of services for 6 months after compulsory retirement


B. Approval of Other transactions:

1. Communications to secretaries or heads of other national government agencies and to the President, foreign government or organizations which are policy determining, confidential or have significant implications on national health policies
2. All administrative orders (ie. issuances which provide policies, standards and rules and regulations)
3. Department orders on
(a) official local travel for the Undersecretaries/ Regional Directors not exceeding 1 calendar month
(b) official local travel for more than 7 calendars days but not more than 1 calendar month for all personnel
4. Travel Authority or Department Order on foreign travel, either on official time, official business or on personal capacity for all personnel
5. Authority to render overtime services with payment of additional compensation computed on an hourly basis
6. Individual consultancy service contracts for the Office of the Secretary proper
7. Notices of award for:
7.1. public or simplified bidding in the central office amounting to P10 million and above
7.2. negotiated and emergency purchase amounting to P2 million and above which are countersigned by at least two (2) undersecretaries

8. Purchase orders contracts, letters and job orders resulting from public bidding in the central office, amounting to P10 million and above and which shall be countersigned by at least two (2) undersecretaries
9. Disbursement vouchers (Box C) for central office major transactions which have ceilings corresponding to 7 and 8 above.
10. Countersigning of checks amounting to P10 million and above 
11. Agency Budget Estimate or DOH Budget Proposal
12. Request for release of Congressional initiatives, Agency initiatives and funds for clearance of concerned Senators/Congressmen
13. Request for budget modiﬁcation and realignment by Offices and Services for approval by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM)
14. Budget modiﬁcation by offices and services not requiring DBM approval pursuant to section 7.2. of NBC 440 dated January 30, 1995 and Administrative Order No. 14-c dated August 4, 1997



II. Transactions for the Chief of Staff:


A. Approval of personnel transactions:

1. For (a) Assistant Secretary, Service Directors, Program Managers and Division Chiefs appointed under/assigned to the Office of the Chief of Staff (OCS) or Services and Program under OCS (b) Staff of the OCS proper and (c) Doctors to the Barrios

1.1. Original, promotional, contractual and co-terminous appointments with the Chief of Staff and reemployment/reinstatement to positions for OCS Division Chiefs and below
1.2. Notice of salary adjustment/salary increases
1.3. Permission to teach, exercise profession or engage in business outside office hours
1.4. (a) Application for sick, vacation, other leaves regardless of the number of days including commutation of money value for Assistant Secretary and Service Directors
(b) Application for sick, vacation, other leaves for 30 working days and more including commutation of money value for OCS personnel below
Service Directors
1.5. Designation of officer-in-charge in the absence of Assistant Secretary, Service Directors, Program Managers under OCS for 1 calendar month or less
1.6. Reassignment from one Service/Unit to another Service or Unit within OCS
1.7. Application for retirement
1.8. Acceptance of resignation
1.9. Request for transfer to another service or other agencies

Other personnel transactions such as applications for leave of absence of the staff of the OCS proper shall be acted upon by/approved by the Assistant Secretary assigned to the Chief of Staff.

2. For all personnel occupying non-CESO positions - Reassignment from one major Office to another


B. Approval of other transactions

1. Communications to regional health offices, retained hospitals, other executive departments, legislative offices.
2. Designation of special disbursing officers for all services under OCS
3. All department orders on
(a) creation of committees/groups to perform specific assignments involving several major Offices, regional offices or specialty hospitals
(b) conduct of /attendance to inter-office conferences, trainings and seminars, meetings
(c) official inter-major office local travel (involving officials and personnel from various major offices) for 7 calendar days and below
(d) official local travel for officials and personnel under OCS for 7 calendar days and below
4. All department circulars
5. All department memoranda
6. Request for organizational staffing modiﬁcation of all DOH Offices and Services
7. Individual consultancy service contracts for the Office of the Chief of Staff proper and Services and programs under OCS
8. Notices of award emanating from the OCS and Services under OCS
8.1. Public/simplified bidding amounting to P2 million to less than P10 million 
8.2. Notices of award thru negotiated and emergency purchase amounting to P500,000 to below P2 million
9. Purchase orders, contracts, letters and job orders as a result of public bidding in the central office involving items under No. 8.
10. Disbursement Voucher (Box C) for central office transactions which have ceilings corresponding to No. 8.
11. Consultancy contracts relating to infrastructure projects, regardless of amount
12. Countersigning of checks amounting to P5 million up to P1Omillion
13. Delegation of authority to Assistant Secretary/heads of offices related to matters or transactions not covered by this administrative order and not contrary to existing administrative and accounting rules and regulations



III. Transactions for all other Undersecretaries of Health:


A. Approval of personnel transactions:

1. For (a) Assistant Secretaries, Bureau /Service Directors, Program Managers and Division Chiefs as specified under the major Offices (b) Staff of their respective Office proper (c) Medical pool shall be under the Undersecretary of Office for
Hospitals and Facilities Service (OHFS) (d) Chiefs of Metro Manila Hospitals including renationalized hospitals under the Undersecretary of OHFS

1.1. Original, promotional, contractual and co-terminous appointments with the Undersecretary; reemployment/reinstatement to positions of Division Chiefs and below
1.2. Original, promotional and reemployment /reinstatement to positions for non-medical positions with salary grade 16 and above for Metro Manila hospitals excluding district hospitals under the National Capital Region shall be approved by the Undersecretary of the Office for Hospitals and Facilities Services 
1.3. Permission to teach, exercise profession or engage in business outside office hours
1.4. (a) Application for sick, vacation, other leaves regardless of the number of days including commutation of money value for Assistant Secretary and Service Directors
(b) Application for sick, vacation, other leaves for 30 working days and more including commutation of money value, for personnel below Service Directors
1.5. Designation of officer-in-charge in the absence of Service Directors, Program Managers, under their Offices for 1 calendar month or less
1.6. Reassignment from one Service/Unit to another Service or Unit within the Office
1.7. Application for retirement
1.8. Resignation
1.9. Request for transfer to another service or other agencies

Other personnel transactions such as applications for leave of absence of the staff of the Office proper shall be acted upon by/approved by the Assistant Secretary assigned to the Office or by the Executive Assistant.


B. Approval of other transactions

1. Office orders authorizing/approving
a. Creation of committees/groups to perform specific assignments involving several Services under their Office
b. Official local travel of all officials and personnel from Services/units under the Office for 7 calendar days and below
c. Designation of Special Disbursing Officers for all Services/Units under it
2. Individual consultancy contracts for the Office proper and Services/units under it.
3. Notices of award emanating from the respective Offices and Services under it thru
3.1. Public/simplified bidding of amounts P2 million and more but less than P10 million
3.2. Notices of award thru negotiated and emergency purchase involving amounts P500,000 to below P2 million
4. Purchase orders, contracts, letters and job orders as a result of public bidding in the central office involving items under 3.
5. Disbursement Voucher (Box C) for central office transactions with ceilings corresponding to 3.
6. Delegation of authority to Assistant Secretary or heads of offices related to matters or transactions not covered by this administrative order and not contrary to existing administrative and accounting rules and regulations e.g. delegation to Assistant Secretaries approval/signing of Box C for transactions involving amounts not greater than P500,000

It shall be noted that approval of transactions for other personnel shall be guided by these provisions:

1. Bureau/Service Directors in DOH central office shall be responsible for the approval of transactions involving their Division chiefs and staff unless otherwise ordered;

2. Regional Directors shall be responsible for the approval of transactions of their Asst. Regional Directors, division heads and their equivalent, and staff in the regional offices; Chiefs of Hospitals of Regional Hospitals, Medical Centers and Sanitaria

Likewise, they shall also be responsible for the approval of original, promotional and reemployment/reinstatement to non-medical positions with salary grade 16 and above in all regional/ medical centers and other DOH hospitals in the regions upon recommendation of the Regional Health Office; including those positions below Division Chief or equivalent of all renationalized hospitals.

3. Chief of Hospitals shall be responsible for the approval of transactions for their division heads and their equivalent, and other staff of DOH hospitals.

Also, they shall be responsible for the approval of original, promotional and reemployment/reinstatement to Medical Officer III & IV and for non-medical positions with salary grade 15 and below in all Metro Manila and Regional Hospitals/Medical Centers, Sanitaria and upon the recommendation of the hospital



IV. For approval by the OMS Undersecretary:

In addition to the transactions indicated under III for all other Undersecretaries, the OMS Undersecretary shall approve the following:

1. Claims for benefits under Sec. 699 of the revised Administrative Code of 1987
2. Clearance Certificate for all employees
3. Countersigning of checks amounting to P2 million to P5million.


Administrative Order 16 s. 1998 and all related issuances, pertinent provisions of all other orders inconsistent with this Order are hereby rescinded.

This Order takes effect immediately.



</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>