Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila 
Telephone No. 743-9502 to 03 or 743-8301 to 23 loc. 1125-1126

<date>02/23/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 8 s. 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in utilizing the services of other procurement agents for the procurement of DOH goods</subject>


<body>

I. Introduction

The Department has since been procuring goods through other agents aside from the accredited suppliers and the Procurement Service of the Department of Budget and  Management (PS-DBM). This is very peculiar for goods that are procured through internationally based non—proﬁt organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations International Children’s Fund (UNICEF). This Option however is only allowed on very justifiable grounds. For example, the good is not available in the country and vital to the success of the program. Or, in certain instances it
was found out that the price of goods procured through foreign sources were much cheaper compared to those procured locally. Records show the goods procured through WHO and UNICEF are Hepatitis B vaccines, measles vaccines, glass ionamers, vitamin A, anti—rabies vaccine and succimers.

While services and programs in the Department has been employing this type of procurement negotiation with WHO and UNICEF, this has brought about problems in reconciling financial accounts relative to reports submitted by the Procurement and Logistics Service (PLS) and the end-user Services. The accountabilities of the latter, such as the end—user Services and Programs in the Department, also could no longer be pointed out for lack of verifiable facts. These problems were reflected in the 1997 Commission on Audit (COA) Report. 

To respond to the foregoing problems and systematize the overall procurement process in the Department, this Order shall specifically state the process and procedures for procuring goods through negotiations with the WHO and the UNICEF.


II. Process/Procedures and Requirements


A. Fo End-User Services in the Department

1. Initiate request for purchase of goods by preparing the Requisition Issue Voucher (RIV).

2. Secure the price quotations from the foreign procurement agents i.e., WHO, UNICEF, etc.

3. Seek for an authority to make an advance payment from the full amount as an exemption to the provisions of Section 88 of Presidential Decree No. 1445 and to enter into a negotiated purchase with foreign procurement
agents like WHO and UNICEF. The intent should be formalized through  a letter addressed to the Office of the President which should also include a brief description of the project, thrust, objectives and underlying output of the project activity.

The following officials should be noted in attention in the letter to the President:

Director General of NEDA - for goods that are in the nature of equipment

Secretary of Department of Finance - for all other type of goods

4. Upon receipt of the approval from the Office of the President, the end-user Service shall prepare the Disbursement Voucher to be forwarded to the Finance Service for processing, with the following supporting documents:
a) Approved RIV
b) Price quotation
c) Foreign exchange rate
d) Approval from the Office of the President

5. Submit/provide the following data to PLS for inspection purposes:
a) Technical specifications
b) Check number
c) Copy of Disbursement Voucher and Purchase Order/contract

6. Inform PLS of the arrival of goods.


B. Finance Service 

1. Process the Disbursement Voucher for payment to foreign procurement agents like WHO and UNICEF.

2. Issue and release check. 

3. Record the delivery and issuance of goods upon submission of the reports by PLS.


C. Procurement and Logistics Service

1. Take charge in the acceptance of the delivery of goods.

2. Responsible in the delivery and distribution of the goods according to the Distribution Plan submitted by the end—user Service or Program and secures the delivery receipt from the forwarder/hauler.

3. Submit a delivery report supported by original copies of delivery receipts to the Finance Service and duplicate copy to COA.

4. Notify end-user Service that delivery has already taken place.


D. WHO/UNICEF

1. To facilitate the reconciliation of accounts and reports from end-users and PLS, WHO and UNICEF shall be made to indicate as reference the Check Number and date of issuance in their delivery receipts.

This Order takes effect immediately.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ JR. M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

