Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 

<date>09/01/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 34 s., 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Disbursement, Utilization and Reporting of 1999 Support to Provincial Health Team (PHT’) Operations, Comprehensive  Health Care Agreement (CHCA), Y2K Compliance and Pne-Health Assembly Funds for Regional and Provincial Health Offices</subject>

<body>

One of the strategies developed to address the Department of Health thrust in decentralization is the strengthening of the Regional Health Oﬁices and Provincial Units to  enhance the local health care delivery system.

In view thereof, selected Local Government Assistance and Monitoring Service (LGAMS) funded activities for 1999 such as the Provincial Health Team (PHT’S) Operations, Comprehensive Health Care Agreement (CHCA), Y2K Compliance and Pre-Health Assemblies are decentralized to the Regional Health Offices.

Operations of the Provincial Health Teams (PHTs) with the DOH Representatives involve coordination/liaisoning with the LGU’s for the implementation of health programs/activities in their respective areas. 

The Comprehensive Health Care Agreement (CHCA) between the Department of Health through the Regional Field Health Offices and Local Government Units is a strategy to enhance partnership in health. It is a package of assistance provided by the DOH to LGUs that is intended to help LGUs in managing health services.

The Y2K compliance activities is pursuant to the implementation of Republic Act No. 8747 and Executive Order No 14. The Department of Health through the LGAMS Coordinators and DOH-Representatives will conduct Y2K networking, awareness, compliance monitoring and other contingency activities specifically for devolved hospitals. Furthermore it directs and coordinates all efforts for year 2000 compliance to avert the threat posed by the “Y2K Bug” or “Millennium Bug” in the health sector. 

The Pre-Health Assemblies serve as a venue for pre-consultation and dialogue among the different stakeholders in the health sector particularly the LGUs, NGOs/ PO’s, health providers, DOH and other agencies/institutions in preparation for the forthcoming National Health Assembly next year. The League of Barangays, NGO’s and the DOH will jointly manage the pre-health assemblies with the League of Barangays as convenor. This will be conducted in six (6) strategic areas of Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao.

In support of these activities, the Local Government Assistance and Monitoring Service (LGAMS) has sub— allotted funds to the DOH-Regional Field Offices excluding DOH-Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao(ARMM) released through a transfer of funds, to facilitate the above-mentioned assistance and activities. 

The guidelines for the utilization, disbursement and reporting of the sub-allotted funds are as follows:

1. The PHTs Operations fund shall be used as an augmentation to the Local Health Board Liaison and Coordination Fund under the GAA. This will be utilized based on the programmed activities in the operations of the Regional LGAMS and Local Health Boards such as LGUs networking, Local Health Board meetings and operations, Comprehensive Health Care. Agreement (CHCA) activities, program monitoring and evaluation as well as other related activities. 

2. Sub-allotted funds for the CHCA negotiations/ signing activities may be used for meetings or a series of meetings which will be hosted by DOH—RFOs.

3. The Y2K Compliance fund is intended to support traveling expenses for Y2K networking and contingency activities with hospitals.

4. The funds for Pre-Health Assemblies shall be used for travel, accommodations at inter-Regional meetings and conferences/assemblies to be conducted in the six (6) strategic areas of Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 

The allocation list for the above mentioned activities is indicated in Annex 1.

The LGAMS Regional Coordinators shall ensure the inclusion of the sub-allotment in the regular submission of Fund Utilization Report (FUR), and the Summary of Expenditures (SOE) duly signed by the Regional Auditor to the DOH Central COA, copy furnished LGAMS.

The LGAMS Coordinator shall ensure that all necessary supporting documents are submitted to the Regional Finance Unit to facilitate timely submission of the Fund Utilization Report (FUR).

In the event that funds are not fully utilized, unutilized balance may be used for any LGAMS activity programmed within the year.

Utilization and disbursement of funds shall follow the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.


</body> 
<sign>SUSAN PINEDA-MERCADO,MD.,M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Undersecretary and Chief of Staff</signtitle>
