Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila 
Telephone No: 743-83-01 to 23 loc. 1125-1131

<date>02/23/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 7 s. 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Preparation of Sub-allotment to Regional Field Offices, Special Hospitals, Retained Hospitals and Bureaus</subject>

<body>

I. Rationale 

Most centrally managed Department of Health (DOH) projects and programs are  being implemented on a nationwide scope. Funds for these are released to the different Services, Programs and Offices under the Central Office. In order to ensure the  successful implementation of these projects and programs, there is a need to allocate funds to the different Regional Health Offices (RHO), Special Hospitals, Retained Hospitals and Bureaus. Furthermore, funds are also sub-allotted to these agencies to augment their limited resources.

This Order is being issued to prescribe the guidelines, rules and regulations on the preparation of sub-allotment to RHOs, Special Hospitals, Retained Hospitals and Bureaus in order to: 

1. Attain uniformity in the procedures of sub-allotting funds to concerned agencies under the DOH. 
2. Fast track implementation of the programs and projects.


II. Definition of Terms

Allotment — refers to an authorization issued by the Department of Budget and Management to an agency which allows it to incur obligations within a specified amount, for a specific purpose and for a specific period covered as contained in a legislative appropriation.

Sub-allotment — is a formal authorization by the head or other authorized official of an agency to a control point or a sub-unit within the agency to incur obligations within a specified amount, for a specific purpose and for a specific period covered.


III. Source of Funds 
Funds for sub- allotment may be sourced from the following: 

1. Regular Program Fund 
2. Foreign Assisted Project Fund
3. Locally Funded Projects
4. Calamity Fund
5. Congressional Initiative Allocation 
6. Countrywide Development Fund
7. Government Share of GSIS Contributions 
8. Donation e.g. - Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office, World Health Organization, United Nations International Children's Fund, etc.


IV. General Guidelines

1. Sub-allotment of funds shall be in accordance with the released GARO/SARO for the approved program/project targets, objectives and work plan. 

2. Fund Utilization Guidelines shall be prepared by the Service Director/Program Manager, to be initiated by the Finance Officer so as to ascertain that the transaction is in accordance with the accounting and auditing rules and regulations and to be approved by the Undersecretary concerned.

3. All Programs/Services of the Central Office shall prepare their respective Disbursement Vouchers for sub-allotment.


V. Specific Guidelines

1. Purpose of the sub-allotment must be specified.

2. Breakdown by Object of Expenditures must include specific expenses to be incurred and to be indicated in the Disbursement Vouchers and Sub-allotment Advice as follows: 

100 	Personal Services
100-10 Other Compensation
	Representation and Transportation Allowance (RATA)
	Step Increment
	Personnel Economic Relief Allowance (PERA)
	Clothing Allowance
	Subsistence Allowance  
	Bonus and Cash Gift  
 	Laundry Allowance 
	Additional Compensation
	Productivity Incentive Beneﬁts
	Medicare 
	Employees Compensation Insurance Premium (ECIP)

200 	Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE)
	02 — Traveling Expenses 
	03 — Communication Expenses 
	04 - Repair and Maintenance of Government Facilities
	05 - Repair and Maintenance of Government Vehicles
	06 — Transportation Services
	07 - Supplies and Materials
	08 — Rent Expense 
	17 - Training Seminar
	29 - Other Services

3. Provisions for the use of savings. Savings from MOOE which were sub—allotted maybe reprogrammed from one object class to another and may be used for other activities of the same program/project provided it was approved by the program Manager and that the total expenses incurred do not exceed the total sub-allotted MOOE. 

4. Cut—off date for the submission of vouchers with Fund Utilization Guidelines to the Budget Division for preparation of Sub—allotment Advice is September 30th of each year. Exemption from the cut-off date is given to Congressional Initiative, Countrywide Development Fund, Calamity Fund, funds for the procurement of drugs and medicines, personnel benefits and others which are emergency in nature.


VI. Responsibility of Heads of Offices Concerned

1. Programs

Program Managers and Heads of Office shall monitor the status of sub—allotments to ensure that funds are being utilized in accordance with the prescribed guidelines.

2. Recipient Regional Health Office/Agency

Recipient Office/Agency shall ensure that persons in-charge of the activity or project and the Budget/Accounting Division are properly informed of these guidelines. Moreover, it shall see to it that the funds are utilized in accordance with the prescribed guidelines and that a fund utilization report with all the pertinent supporting documents duly verified by the Auditor is prepared and submitted to the DOH-Central Office and Program Managers concerned, copy furnished the Finance Service. Said documents should be submitted within 15 days upon completion of the activity or project. Violation or use of sub-allotted funds not consistent with the prescribed guidelines will render the Head of Office as well as the Finance Office administratively liable.


VII. Budgeting Procedures

1. The Disbursement Section of the Budget Division shall prepare six (6) copies of the Sub—allotment Advice based on the submitted Fund Utilization Guidelines together with the Disbursement Vouchers. The copies of Sub-allotment Advice shall be furnished to the following offices:
Original Copy and 1 copy	— attached to Disbursement Voucher
1copy 				- Budget Division 
2 copies 			- Accounting Division
1 copy  			- Program Managers 

2. The Cashier Section shall issue checks based on the approved Disbursement  Vouchers and release the same together with the original copy of the Sub-allotment Advice and the Fund Utilization Guidelines to the RHO/Agency concerned.


VIII. Fund utilization and reporting requirements shall follow the usual budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations

This order shall take effect immediately.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
