DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

<date>08/15/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 29 s. 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Utilization of Regional Primary Health Care (PHC) Funds as approved in the General Appropriation Act (GAA), Republic Act No. 8745 of calendar Year 1999.</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE

The Philippines as one of the signatories to the 1978 Alma Ata Declaration on Primary Health Care (PHC) and as a member nation is committed to the principles and goals of PHC. Since 1978, the Department of Health (DOH) had consistently supported PHC through innovative community health projects and programs undertaken nationwide in partnership with local agencies/ organizations.

In line with the Health Reform Agenda and current policy of the DOH to support the Local Government Code devolving the implementation of basic health services and PHC to the Local Government Units (LGUs), Regional PHC Funds are allocated to the DOH Regional Health Offices. The Regional PHC funds are primarily allocated to provide support for PHC initiatives at the provincial, municipal and barangay levels towards institutionalizing PHC approaches at the Local Government Units and target communities.

The Regional Primary Health Care Funds are sub-allotted to Regional Field Health Offices (RFHO) to manage implement, monitor and evaluate PHC activities of the LGUs, Nongovernment Organizations (NGOs), People‘s Organization (POs), communities and other sectors.


II. OBJECTIVES

Following from the rationale of institutionalizing and strengthening local health systems for PHC, activities shall now pursue the following objectives:

1. Strengthen the capabilities of the RFHO to institutionalize PHC activities at their level.

2. Institutionalize PHC at the LGU levels (Provincial, Municipal and Barangay) through the development of a functional mechanisms for multisectoral collaboration, provision of technical and financial assistance, strengthening of participatory approaches and establishment of community-based health care financing systems at the localities.

3. Develop community-managed health care systems through a progressive process of empowerment, which adheres to the principles and framework of PHC.

4. Link local PHC activities and projects initiated by the RFHOs, LGUs, NGOs, POs), and communities to national and local initiatives on the District Health System (DHS) and Local Health Systems Development (LHSD).

5. Provide opportunities for inter-sectoral collaboration on PHC as well as information exchange and advocacy of good PHC practices.


III. PHC STRATEGIES

The PHC Objectives shall be realized through the following strategies:

1. Strengthening of Regional DOH technical capabilities for PHC approaches. This strategy involves the establishment of institutional systems at the Regional DOH to manage and sustain community programs or projects promoting PHC principles and strategies. The Regional Health Offices shall be responsible for formulating PHC strategies for community health development, provision of technical and financial assistance to LGUs, NGOs, POs and communities on PHC. The RFHO shall also be responsible for monitoring these community health development programs/projects, and documenting models of partnership or multisectoral collaboration mechanisms for PHC.

2. Capacity and partnership building of major stakeholders (DOH, LGUs NGOs, POs and other government agencies) for PHC and community health development activities. This strategy involves the development of functional mechanisms for multisectoral collaboration and capability—building activities of partners.

3. Focus-target on special populations and marginal communities that are underserved, unserved, depressed and hard to reach, with the purpose of improving their health status through community participation.

4. Support through grants, community health development programs and projects, which use participatory approaches. These approaches aim to organize and mobilize the community towards developing community-managed health care systems and community-based health care financing systems through a progressive process of empowerment, which adheres to the principles and framework of PHC. This strategy includes institutionalizing local health systems, building community health structures and support groups.

5. Provide the appropriate fora or community/local mechanisms that aim to strengthen People’s Organizations and other support groups as practitioners of PHC.

6. Establishment of PHC Resource Centers at the local level, which maintain information/database on PHC activities and advocate best PHC practices in the locality and sustain conduct of fora for information exchange.


IV. PHC ACTIVITIES

The following are PHC activities:


A. Strengthening of Regional PHC Systems

1. PHC Orientation for RFHO staff and personnel, program coordinators, and DOH representatives;

2. Capability building activities including trainings on “Health in the Hands of the People” for stakeholders LGUs, NGOs, POs and other communities;

3. Institutional strengthening of Regional PHC Teams;

4. Implementation of PHC activities review, monitoring and evaluation;

5. Establishment of inter-LGU or multisectoral collaborations with LGUs, private and public institutions to advocate PHC approaches, through fora for information exchange and PHC expertise sharing;

6. Establishment of PHC management systems to sustain technical and financial support to LGUs, NGOs, POs and communities;

7. Development of materials for PHC advocacy and documentation of best PHC practices;


B. Institutionalization of PHC

1. Orientation on PHC for LGUs, NGOs, POs and communities;

2. Partnership—building activities among LGUs, NGOs, POs, and communities;

3. Multisectoral planning activities for PHC projects and programs;

4. Capability—building activities for LGUs, NGOs and POs on PHC and PHC—related activities;

5. Implementation, monitoring and evaluation activities for PHC;

6. Strengthening of inter-LGU collaboration for PHC activities;

7. Integration of PHC activities into the Local Health Systems Development;

8. Strengthening of the Local Health Boards for PHC.


C. Local PHC Systems Development

1. Community Health Development Activities

1.1 Provision of grant funds to support LGUs/NGOs/POs in addressing community health needs in priority areas;

1.2 Support for the training of Indigenous Cultural Communities and step—Ladder education of the Indigenous People;

1.3 Provision of grant funds to Non—governmental Organizations for community planning, community organizing and social mobilization related to PHC activities; logistic support for monitoring and evaluation

1.4 Development of community—based information system such as the Minimum Basic Needs Approach, community health data boards or Other such innovations; operational researches on PHC;

1.5 Other PHC activities such as community-based malaria control projects, community-based feeding projects, community based schistosomiasis control projects, low cost education campaign health promotion materials, environmental sanitation project and botica ng barangay;

1.6 Development of community-managed health care financing schemes to sustain PHC activities including health care financing scheme for

2. Assistance to Barangay Health Workers

2.1 Medical Assistance to BHW

2.2 BHW Scholarship Fund-Support only for the BHW and/or a child of BHW accepted under the Innovative Health Science Education Partnership Program

2.3 BHWs Federation and Capability Building

3. President‘s Youth Work Program (PYWP)/Kabataan 2000 with special preference to children of BHWs, out of school youth and youth from 4th, 5th and 6th class municipalities, and children from Indigenous Cultural Communities

4. Inter-LGU and NGO collaboration for Local Health System Development


V. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISMS

1. The following are the tasks of the Regional Field Health Offices through the PHC Team or Coordinator:

1.1 Set-up funding mechanism at the RFHO to facilitate funding support for LGUs, NGOs, POs, academe and communities willing to participate in PHC activities;

1.2 Establish inter-LGU and NGO collaboration mechanisms at regional, provincial and municipal levels for PHC activities;

1.3 Provide technical assistance to LGUs, NGOs, POs and communities related to PHC projects and processes;

1.4 Oversee and facilitate PHC capability-building activities of LGUs, NGOs, POs and communities;

1.5 Conduct quarterly monitoring and evaluation activities.  

2. Funding Mechanisms

A separate book of accounts for PHC funds shall be maintained by the Finance Unit of the RFHO.

1. Sixty percent (60%) of the PHC fund shall be utilized for Community Health Development, Twenty Five percent
(25%) for strengthening of Regional and Local Government Units (LGUs) on PHC and Fifteen percent (15%) for Human Resource Development or capability building activities for DOH, NGOs, LGUs and POs

2. Provisions of funds to LGUs, NGOs, POs, Academe and other entities external to this Department shall be effected through a Memorandum of Agreement between the region and the proponent. COA Circular No. 94-013 dated December 13, 1994 and No. 96-003 dated February 27, 1996 shall be considered in the preparation of the said MOAs.

3. No deviations and/or realignment from the enumerated Activities shall be allowed unless approved by the Secretary of Health

In view of the current thrust and activities of the DOH on PHC, the following initiatives shall be undertaken by the Region for the succeeding year:

1. Transfer of the PYWP/Kabataan 2000 to the line budget of the Region

2. Conversion of medical assistance to BHWs into socialized insurance schemes in coordination with the local Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC)

3. Formal assessment of the concept and mechanics of implementation of the Innovative Health Science Education Partnership Program (IHSEPP), to include an evaluation of the effect and impact of the services rendered by the Program graduates in the communities.


VI. Effectivity Clause

This Order takes effect immediately.

  
</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
