Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>02/02/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 5 s., 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Creation of the National Health Promotion Committee and Guidelines for Health Promotion and IEC Development for the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>

Health Promotion was once seen as an auxiliary activity to support disease control programs. Over
recent years, the rise in morbidity and mortality rates due to conditions related to lifestyle and behavior underscore the importance of strengthening health promotion activities and capabilities at all levels of the health sector.

A National Health Promotion Committee will be created to develop a national strategy to promote health and well being by providing the public with information on how to maintain wellness and prevent disease. As a first step in the realization of the goals for health promotion the following guidelines are issued to improve the quality and effectiveness of information, education and communication for health.

Under these guidelines, all offices, units, hospitals, services, health facilities, programs and projects of the Department of Health are hereby required to adhere to the following principles and guidelines for IEC development:


GENERAL PRINCIPLES

1. Health promotion should be a priority intervention for disease control and prevention as well as in maintenance of health at all levels of the health care system;
2. Health promotion, health education and information dissemination should be undertaken by all health facilities;
3. Health education and health promotion materials should be developed based on communication research and should be systematically and scientifically reviewed and tested for effectiveness and impact prior to mass production and dissemination;
4. Every effort must be taken to professionalize the career path of health educator, information officers and communications experts in health in order to maintain high standards for public information interventions for disease prevention and control as well as health promotion;


I. CREATION OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH PROMOTION COMMITTEE

Under this order, the Secretary of Health will organize and designate members of the national Health Promotion Committee to serve for one year, to ensure implementation of a national strategy for health promotion.

The National Health Promotion Committee for 1999 will be composed of the following:

Chair: 		Undersecretary Susan Pineda - Mercado

Members: 	Prof. Sandra Tempongko
		Director Marietta G. Bernaje
		Director Adelisa C. Ramos
		Prof. Gilda Uy
		Dr. Paulyn Ubial
		Mr. Danny Javier
		Mr. Jun Urbano
		Dr. Ofelia Alcantara
		Dr. Ruben Flores
		Mr. Gerry Trillana
		Dr. Menguita Padilla


II. GUIDELINES FOR THE CONCEPTUALIZATION PHASE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE COMMUNICATION PLAN

Prior to IEC development, a comprehensive annual communication plan should be developed and approved at least six months prior to the date of implementation. Under this order, all programs and facilities are encouraged to start the development of their communication plans in April 1999 in preparation for the year 2000.

Each program should create a Health Education Experts Panel (HEEP)to approve the annual communication plan. The HEEP should be a multi disciplinary team with both technical and communications experts. The National Health Promotion Committee will approve composition of HEEP.

With the exception of communications research activities that may require large sample audiences, all other aspects of the conceptualization phase must be undertaken by the health educators and the technical staff of the different units of the Department of Health and cannot be sub—contracted to other agencies or institutions, unless otherwise approved by EXECOM.

a. Communications Research — prior to development of a communication plan, baseline data must be generated on relevant attitudes, knowledge, information and skills of the target audience from primary and /or secondary sources. Where this is not available or a wide sample base is needed to establish new data, research activities maybe sub-contracted to professional groups or agencies with a track record in communications research.

b. Health Education Diagnosis — analysis of the baseline data should be done utilizing the PRECEDE framework in consultation with technical and communications experts wherein the following factors should be identified
* Predisposing factors
* Enabling factors
* Reinforcing factors

c. Development of a Communication Plan - a communication plan should be developed based on research (a) and analysis (b). The plan should have the following components:
* Behavioral objectives
* Target audiences / communications strategy
* Proposed media mix
* Expected outcomes
* Assessment and monitoring mechanism
* Proposed budget
* Work and financial plan

d. Regional Communication Plans — regional offices and health facilities are also encouraged to follow the above — mentioned steps for development of communication plans. Partnerships and participation of local experts and / or institutions that deal with training and education of communications experts are encouraged i.e. faculty members of universities and colleges with Mass Communication Departments, local broadcasters and news reporters / feature writers may be invited to be part of the regional HEEP;

e. Hospital—based IEC Development - each hospital should create a Health Promotion and Patient Education Team (HPPET) to be headed by a nurse educator or equivalent. The National Health Promotion Committee will approve composition of HPPET. Nurses involved in development of Centers of Wellness programs should be encouraged to head the team. All nurse educators whose activities require full time work, should have an option to be relieved of clinical responsibilities in order to enable them to concentrate on development of IEC and health education activities in the hospital setting.

f. The Multi — media Center for Excellence will serve as a training & technical support unit for health promotion. The center will also establish linkages with other groups involved in communication research and information and dissemination.

g. Consultancies for communications must be approved by the national Health Promotion Committee.


II. GUIDELINES FOR MESSAGE DEVELOPMENT AND CREATIVE WORK

After a communications plan is developed by the program and approved by the HEEP, processes maybe put into place for message development and creative work should be done in— house. All health educators, information & public relations officers who developed messages and creative work reserve the right to patent their work and establish authorship. All forms of creative work should be properly acknowledged, especially in print media. Incentives may be given for in — house message development and creative work in order to strengthen creative capabilities within the Department of Health.

Whenever necessary or appropriate, programs and projects may also tap community based talents or professionals to assist in message development and creative work. However, in cases where message development and creative work is sub—contracted to another agency or institution, the Department of Health will reserve the right to patents and authorship. This must be clearly expressed in the contract. All contracts for message development and creative work must be contracted separately from contracts for production of materials, based on the following criteria:

* Local shopping — P50,000 below
* Public bidding — above P50,000 and in accordance with A.O. 14 B s., 1997

a. Message development — development of messages may start with inputs from technical staff of the programs to be modified by the message development/ creative work team (in—house or sub-contracted) based on the health education diagnosis;

b. Validation — all messages should be field tested through focus group discussions or other participatory methods to validate effectiveness and impact. Contracts for message development / creative work will only be considered complete after subjecting the materials to field testing and final approval of the Creative Concepts Committee. These aspects of message development / creative work may or may not be part of the message development and creative work contract.

c. Recommendation for approval by the Creative Concepts Committee - all messages / creative work will be reviewed and recommended for approval by the Creative Concepts Committee to the National Health Promotion Committee, prior to production. First submission of materials should be given at least three months prior to date of implementation. Whenever necessary or appropriate exceptions may be made under emergency situations subject to the approval of the National Health Promotion Committee.


III. GUIDELINES FOR PRODUCTION OF IEC MATERIALS

PRINT MATERIALS
a. As much as possible, production of IEC materials should be decentralized. Prototypes developed at the national level may be modified and adapted in the vernacular to make these more relevant to the target audiences
b. When appropriate and necessary, print materials may be produced at the national level through the Multi—Media Center for Excellence, or may be sub—contracted to private production firms, provided they will be used for limited and specific target populations such as;
i. specialized groups within the health sector
ii. the international community
iii. national government agencies
iv. health NGOs
v. local government leaders
vi. policy makers

BROADCAST MATERIALS

a. When appropriate and relevant, The National Health Promotion Committee may develop national health campaigns utilizing mass media based on the following:

i. magnitude of the problem is of public health proportion
ii. social relevance and public perception that multi sectoral action is necessary
iii. sensitivity of the problem to behavioral / attitudinal change
iv. availability of services on national scale

b. As much as possible, national campaigns should be conceptualized in—house. However, whenever necessary, the national Health Promotion Committee may recommend sub - contracting the creative as well as production components of national campaigns, provided these are contracted separately as mentioned above.

c. Unless specified by the Secretary of Health, the Department of Health should not directly purchase air time for broadcast purposes, and will instead exert every effort to generate private sector support for mass media campaigns.

d. As much as possible, the Department of Health should institutionalize partnerships with broadcast networks for health promotion.


IV. GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSMENT AND EVALUATION

a. The National Health Promotion Committee will develop guidelines for assessment and evaluation for all forms of IEC materials for the guidance of the HEEP/HPPET.

b. The National Health Promotion committee will evaluate cost effectiveness of specific IEC interventions and may recommend discontinuance of ineffective IEC activities.

c. The National Health Promotion Committee will submit an annual report to the Secretary of Health on all health promotion activities at the end of every year.

d. The National Health Promotion Committee will meet regularly on Tuesday afternoons from 3:30 — 4:30 at the Office for Public Health Services.


</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR. M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>