Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
2nd Flr. Bldg. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila
Telephone No. 711-6297 or 743-8301 to 23 loc. 2325-27 

<date>05/13/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 16-A s. 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATION OF DISABILITY TO PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES</subject>

<body>

A. RATIONALE

Republic Act No. 7277 otherwise known as the Magna Carta for Disabled Persons provides tax incentives for employers and donors to government agencies engaged in the rehabilitation of disabled persons and organizations of disabled persons. As stipulated in Section 3 of Revenue Regulations No. 8-93 issued by the Department of Finance-Bureau of Internal Revenue on January 29, 1993 under "Incentives for Employers and Private Entities," private entities that employ qualified disabled persons either as regular employee, apprentice or learner shall be entitled to an additional deduction from their gross income for the taxable year, in an amount equivalent to 25% of the total amount paid as salaries/wages to disabled persons, over and above the total allowable ordinary and necessary business deductions for said salaries and wages as provided under Sec 29 of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended, subject to the presentation of the following proofs, among others:

"A certifcation from DOLE and DOH as to the disability, skills and qualifications of the disabled person/s employed by such private entity"

Definition of Terms:

The Magna Carta for Disabled Persons defines Disability as (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more psychological, physiological or anatomical function of an individual or activities of such individual; (2) record of such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an impairment.

Impairment is defined as any loss, diminution or aberration of psychological, physiological or anatomical structure or function.

B. GENERAL GUIDELINES

Annex 1 which is an integral part of this Order contains an enumeration of the offices and hospitals under the Department of Health authorized to issue medical certificates to person with disability (PWD) who are currently employed by private companies:

1. Requirements for the issuance of the medical certificates to persons with disabilities will be on a case-by-case basis as deemed necessary by the attending physician, depending on the type of disability of the person. All laboratory examinations and ancillary procedures requested by the attending physician as part of the physical examination shall be done by the respective employers.

2. The medical certificate to be issued shall contain the following information:
Name
Age
Sex
Address
Diagnosis (specify the type of disability of the person)

The certificate shall be accompanied in triplicate by the attending physician. The original copy should be given to the PWD. The duplicate should serve as the hospital copy. The triplicate should be forwarded by the hospital to the Regional Health Directors. NCR tertiary hospitals could forward the triplicate directly to the Disability Program under the Office for Public Health Services. The certificate to be issued should contain the signature of the Medical Center Chief/Chief of Hospital or his duly designated representative.

3. For companies with clinic facilities accredited by the Department of Health, employers are requested to send their PWD-employee to hospital/offices under the Department of Health for issuance of medical certificates.

4. At the end of the year, the Regional Health Directors shall submit to the Disability Program under the Office for Public Health Services a list of all persons with disabilities issued medical certificates by the respective Medical Center Chiefs/Chiefs of Hospitals within their geographical jurisdiction

For strict implementation and compliance.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

I. LIST OF OFFICES AND HOSPITALS UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE MEDICAL CERTIFICATES TO PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES

1. Division of Medical Examination and Department Infirmary (MEID) of the Department of Health Central Office
(San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila)

2. Out-Patient Department of the Department of Internal Medicine of the following hospitals:

A.  Metro Manila
a. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center
(Rizal, Avenue, Manila)
b. Philippine Heart Center
(East Avenue, Quezon City)
c. East Avenue Medical Center
(East Avenue, Quezon City)
d. Amang Rodriguez Medical Center
(Marikina, Metro Manila)
e. Tondo Medical Center
(Balut, Tondo, Manila)
f. Quirino Memorial Medical Center
(Project 4, Quezon City)
g. Las Pinas District Hospital
(Las Pinas, Metro Manila)
h. Valenzuela District Hospital
(Polo, Valenzuela)
i. Rizal Medical Center
(Shaw Blvd., Pasay City)
j. Jose N. Rodriguez Memorial Hospital
(Tala, Kalookan City)
k. Philippine Orthopedic Center
(Banawe Ave., Quezon City)
l. National Center for Mental Health
(Mandaluyong City, Manila)
m. National Kidney and Transplant Institute
(East Avenue, Quezon City)

B. Region I
a. Mariano Marcos Memorial Hospital and Medical Center
(Batac, Ilocos Norte)
b. Ilocos Regional Hospital
(San Fernando, La Union)
c. Gov. Teofilo Sison Memorial Hospital
(Dagupan City)

C. Region II
a. Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital
(Tuguegarao, Cagayan)
b. Veterans Regional Hospital
(Bayombong, Nueva Viscaya)

D. Region III
a. Jose B. Lingad Memorial and General Hospital
(San Fernando, Pampanga)
b. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center
(Cabanatuan City)

E. Region IV
a. Batangas Regional Hospital
(Batangas City)

F. Region V
a. Bicol Regional and Teaching Hospital
(Legaspi City)
b. Bicol Medical Center
(Naga City)

G. Region VI
a. Western Visayas Medical Center
(Mandurriao, Iloilo City)
b. Corazon Locsin Memorial Medical Research Hospital
(Bacolod City)

H. Region VII
a. Vicente Sotto Sr. Memorial Medical Center
(Cebu City)
b. Gov. Celestino Gallares Memo Hospital
(Tagbilaran City)

I. Region VIII
a. Eastern Visayas Regional Medical Center
(Tacloban City)

J. Region IX
a. Zamboanga City Medical Center
(Zamboanga City)

K. Region X
a. Northern Mindanao Medical Center
(Cagayan de Oro City)

L. Region XI
a. Davao Medical Center
(Bajada, Davao City)
b. Davao Regional Hospital
(Tagum, Davao del Norte)

M. Region XII
a. Cotabato Regional Hospital
(Cotabato City)

N. CAR
a. Baguio General Hospital and Medical Center
(Baguio City)

II. HOSPITALS WITH AUDIOMETRIC FACILITIES DIAGNOSTIC FOR HEARING IMPAIRMENT:

A. University of Santo Tomas Hearing and Dizziness Center
B. Quirino Memorial Medical Center
C. Rizal Medical Center

Regional private audiological centers conducting pure tone audiometry on deaf persons will be requested to send their findings through facsimile to  UST Hearing and Dizziness Center (632) 749-9742, Quirino Memorial Medical Center (632) 913-4754 or Rizal Medical Center (632) 671-4216 for issuance of medical certificates.