Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
2nd Flr., Bldg. 1, San Lazaro COmpOund, Rizal Avenue, Manila
  

<date>09/27/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 121 s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: STANDARDS FOR DIABETES EDUCATION IN THE PHILIPPINES</subject>

<body>

The National Diabetes Commission created through the Republic Act No. 8191 (also known as National Diabetes Act of 1996), in compliance with Section 7 of the said Act, formulated the long range Master Plan for the National Diabetes Prevention and Control Program in its effort to reduce the high rate of increase in diabetes prevalence as well as the morbidity and mortality rates. The focus of the program is on the primordial and primary level of prevention which calls for the development and strengthening of the awareness campaigns and the continuing education of health personnel and concerned individuals to prevent the disease and its complications.

On August 25, 1998, through a Department Order No. 142-G FAE series 1998, signed by then Secretary of Health, Dr. Felipe A. Estrella, the Committee for the Accreditation of Diabetes Educators in the Philippines was created to determine the standards and procedures for the accreditation of training courses, trainers and trainees on diabetes, its prevention and control.

The Department of Health hereby issues the following “Standards for Diabetes Education in the Philippines.”


I. Title

This administrative issuance shall be known as the Standards for Diabetes Education in the Philippines.


II. Purpose

The Committee on Accreditation under the National Diabetes Commission (now the Oversight Committee) is tasked with the following:
1. To develop a framework on diabetes education
2. To formulate the standards of practice for Diabetes Educators
3. To develop the core curriculum for Diabetes Educators
4. To create a body that would accredit or certify Diabetes Educators
5. To develop/establish mechanisms for accreditation/certification of Institutions and individuals.


III. Scope
1. Role of the Diabetes Educators
A Diabetes Educator has a multidimensional role with boundaries for accountability that interface with the other members of the health team. Diabetes Education involves the education of patients with diabetes, their families and appropriate support systems, on diabetes self-management and related issues. It Is also intended to include increasing public
diabetes and its socioeconomic implications as well as educating other health personnel who do not specialize in diabetes care and management.

2. Basic topics to be included in the contents of the education package:
. Epidemiology of Diabetes Mellitus
. Physiology of Diabetes Mellitus
. Basic principles in the prevention of Diabetes Mellitus
. Genetic counselling
. Principles and strategies of diabetes education
. Exercise and activity
. Nutritional management
. Pharmacological interventions
. Self-monitoring of glycemic control
. Psychological assessment and support
. Behavior modification
. Stress management
. Problem solving skills
. Prevention and management of acute and chronic complications
. Economics in the treatment of diabetes
. Use of health care delivery system
3. The specialty practice shall include the following settings:
. the schools
. the community
. the workplace
. the hospital 
4. Recommended Standards for Diabetes Education Program includes:
4.1.Structure standards 
4.1.1. Human resources 
a. Diabetes educators
b. Training faculty
4.1.2. Physical resources
4.1.3. Curriculum of the Diabetes Education Program
4.1.4. Coordination and Administration Flow
4.2. Process Standards and Indicators for Diabetes Education
4.3. Outcome Standards for Diabetes Education and Diabetes Educators and their indicatOrs

A Council for the Accreditation and Certification of Diabetes Educators in the Philippines (CADEP) shall be established to uphold the highest level of standard for diabetes education and practice in the country. The Council shall be composed of health care professionals from various disciplines to be recommended by the Oversight Committee for Diabetes (National Diabetes Commission).

 
V. Effectivity

This Administrative Order shall take effect upon approval by the Secretary of Health. 

 
</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
