Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>05/09/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 49-A s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Policy Guidelines in the Implementation / Operations of the DOH Botica in all DOH Retained Hospitals.</subject>

<body>

I. Rationale Background

The 1987 Constitution provides that:

”The State shall protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness among them” (Section 15, Article II).

”The State shall adopt an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development which shall endeavor to make essential goods health and other social services available to all the people at affordable cost” (Section II, Article XIII).

”The State shall establish and maintain an effective food and drug regulatory system and undertake appropriate health manpower development and research responsive to the country’s health needs and problems" (Section 12, Article XIII)


Generics Act of 1988 (R.A. 6675)

Paragraph 1 to 5, Section 2 of the Generics Act of 1988 (R.A. 6675) declare as the policy of the state, among others, the following:
 
To promote, encourage and require the use of generic terminology in the importation, manufacture, distribution, marketing, advertising and promotion, prescription and dispensing of drugs. 

To ensure the adequate supply of drugs with generic names at the lowest possible cost and endeavor to make them available for free to indigent patients;

To encourage the extensive use of drugs with generic names through a rational system of procurement and distribution;

To emphasize the scientific basis for the use of drugs, in order that health professionals may become aware and cognizant of their therapeutic effectiveness; and

To promote drug safety by minimizing duplication of medications and/or use of drugs with potentially adverse drug interactions.

In line with the above mandate, it is imperative that DOH funded hospitals as health care organizations shall provide adequate and continuous supply of quality, safe and efficacious drugs at affordable cost, consistent with the needs of the patient/consumers.

To meet this need, the hospital shall maintain a pharmaceutical service, to be known as the DOH Botica that conforms with ethical, professional standards and legal requirements. It is to constitute the concept and practice of pharmaceutical care service of pharmacist to patients/consumers and the general public.

Moreover, through this project, the DOH objective is to make drugs and medicines affordable to the Filipino people alleviating the burden of high cost of the same, and to deliver total consumer satisfaction through effective client—friendly services. The Botica can offer services on the following: counselling of patients on dosage and frequency of administration, prescribed regimen and other health care informations for good drug compliance which would include among others, blood pressure—taking, advice for care of elderly, travel medicines consultations and other activities associated with self-care:


II. Policy Guidelines

1. The DOH Botica must adhere to the pertinent provisions of the following laws, rules and regulations:

1.1 RA 5921 as amended, known as an Act Regulating the Practice of Pharmacy and Setting Standards of Pharmaceutical Education in the Philippines and for other purposes.

1.2 RA 4226, known as the Hospital Licensure Act.

1.3 R.A. No. 3720 as amended, known as the Food, Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics Act, its rule and regulations in licensing drug establishments and drug outlets under the authority of the Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD) as provided for in A.O. 56 s. 1989, the Revised Regulations for the Licensing of Drug Establishments and Outlets.

1.4 R.A. No. 6425 as amended, known as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972 under the authority of the Dangerous Drug Board in the registration and for the issuance of a license to deal in dangerous drugs and exempt preparations as provided in Article II Section 2 (a) of the Dangerous Drugs Board Regulation No.4 s. 1991.

1.5 R.A. 6675, known as the Generics Act of 1988 its rules and regulations in the Prescribing and Dispensing Requirements as provided for in A.O. 62 and 63 s. 1989, respectively. 

1.6 Executive Order No. 49 of 1993, Directing the Mandatory Use of the Philippine National Drug Formulary (PNDF) Volume I current edition as the Basis for Procurement of Drug Products by the Government.

1.7 Administrative Order No. 47 s 1999 dated November 1999 re: Guidelines in the Implementation/Operations of the Expansion of the Gamot sa Presyong DOH.

2. The building design of the DOH Botica, including details and appropriate signages, shall comply with the approved DOH Model Plan. Its location in the hospital main building or compound should be on the ground floor and shall be highly accessible and visible to all its intended beneficiaries.

3. The operation and management of the DOH Botica Project shall be directly handled by a pharmacist with sufficient technical and support staff to perform the tasks exclusively for this project.

4 Beneficiaries

The beneficiaries will include in and out-patients of the hospital and the general public.

5.1 Pharmaceuticals and biologicals for sale

5.1.1. Pharmaceutical dispensed with ordinary prescription form

* Ethical or prescription drugs
* Exempt prohibited and regulated drugs

5.1.2 Pharmaceutical dispensed with special prescription form

* Prohibited and Regulated Drugs

5.1.3 Pharmaceuticals dispense without prescription

* Nonprescription or over the counter drugs
* Household remedies 

5.2 Medical Supplies

5.3 Nutritional and Hygienic Products; Toiletries

6 Funds

6.1 The existing Revolving Fund (RF) for drugs and medicines shall be the initial funding source including that of the Murang Carnot Presyong  DOH, if any.
6.2 The existing ceiling of the RF shall be maintained. The RF shall consist of the stock on hand and for delivery and cash in bank at any given time which shall not exceed the approved ceiling. However, an increase in the ceiling shall be determined and recommended by the Secretary of Health to the Department of Budget and Management for approval.

7 Selling Price of Drugs and Medicines

7.1 Drugs and medicines, biologicals, medical supplies, etc shall be sold at a maximum mark-up of 30% to be added to the cost.

8 Disposition/use of profit (Revolving Fund)

All proceeds (cost plus profit) from sales of D/M, biologicals, medical supplies, nutritional and other hygienic products etc. shall be deposited in an authorized government depository bank and shall be made available for procurement of the above-mentioned items for replenishment (2.4 NBC No. 321,and COA C.R. No. 128)

9 For monitoring and Control of Sales/Collection

9.1 A cashier shall be designated to handle the collection / recording / reporting of sales who shall be bonded in accordance with existing rules and regulations.

10 Accounting and Recording

10.1 The funds for the DOH Botica shall be treated as Revolving Trust Fund in accordance with Joint NB Circular No. 321 / COA Circular No. 128.
10.2 The project fund shall be accounted / reported separately from the existing revolving funds for drugs and medicines established under Batas Pambansa Blg. 40 (1980 GAA) authorized under Joint NB Circular No. 321 and COA Circular No. 280.
10.3 Support ledgers records shall be maintained on the purchase and sale of drugs and medicines, medical supplies and others.

11. Reporting

A regular RF monthly report on the sale of drugs and medicines, biologicals, etc. indicating issuances to in and out-patients and the general public shall be prepared / submitted by the DOH Botica Pharmacist In—Charge noted by the Chief Pharmacist to the hospital accounting office copy furnished COH and AO, HOMS and NDPP on or before the 5th working day of the following month.

12. Procurement and Warehousing Unit

12.1 Procurement of drugs and medicines shall be in accordance with the DOH Procurement System.

12.1.1 An Annual Drug Procurement Program (ADPP) shall be prepared by Pharmacist In—charge covering the requirement including medical supplies, etc. of the DOH Botica Project prior to the budget year. The said ADPP shall be based on the selection / evaluation of the drugs and medicines by the Therapeutics Committee.

12.1.2 The list of drug requirement of the hospital shall be forwarded to PLS, DOH Central Office at a designated date for bidding.

12.1.3 Hospitals concerned are furnished with a Price Schedule (Winning Bid Prices) by the DOH, PLS Central Office as the basis for procurement. 

12.2 Inspection and acceptance of deliveries

The inspection and acceptance team shall conduct technical inspection and acceptance as to the batch, lot number, expiry date etc.

The number of products for sampling shall be taken at random from the delivery to be subjected to BFAD laboratory test at no cost to the end order but chargeable to the supplier/ distributor.

12.3 Warehousing - Receipts / Inspection / Storage and Issuance of stocks from the DOH Botica.

The stocks of drugs, medicines, etc. shall be separated from the regular hospital stocks for the issuance to the indigent in patients. To ensure the efficacy and potency of drugs and medicines, appropriate storage facilities shall be provided particularly those needing refrigeration.


III. Repealing Clause

All prevIous Orders InconsIstent in part or in whole to this Administrative Order are hereby rescinded or amended accordingly.


IV. Effectivity

This order takes effect immediately.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>