Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Bldg. # 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1014, Philippines
Telephone Nos: 711-95-02/711-95-03, Fax No. 743-1829

<date>01/12/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 5 s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the integration of leprosy services in hospitals</subject>

<body>

BACKGRDUND:

Multi—Drug Therapy (MDT) is a proven effective cure for leprosy. The World Health organization (WHO) Expert Committee on Leprosy reported that Rifampicin, one of the component drug of MDT, is an exceptionally patent bactericidal agent against M. leprae. A single dose of 600 mg is capable of killing 99.9% or more of viable organisms thus rendering patients non-infectious. Persons Affected with Leprosy (PAL) can now be treated at home and need not be segregated or isolated at the sanitarium. 

The National Leprosy Control Program (NLCP) was implemented nationwide in 1988 by integrating leprosy services in into the general health services delivery system using MDT as a strategy to control and prevent the spread of the disease. In 1991, the World Health Organization (WHO) encouraged all member nations to eliminate leprosy as a public health problem by attaining a prevalence rate of less than 1 case per 10,000 population by end of year 2000.


RATIONALE:

The nationwide implementation of MDT enabled the Philippines to achieve the leprosy elimination goal at the national level with a prevalence rate of 0.9/10,000 population at the end of 1993. It is desired that by the end of year 2000, all regions and provinces will have prevalence rates of less than 1 case/10,000 population. Thus, very few leprosy cases will be seen. Hospitals will definitely have to play an important role in the leprosy post elimination era. Hence, the need to integrate and provide leprosy services in hospitals.

It is envisioned that in provinces where leprosy has been eliminated as a public health problem a leprosy pest elimination surveillance system will be established to prevent reversal to the pre-elimination situation. Hospitals will then serve as validation centers where suspected leprosy cases seen at the rural health units will be referred for confirmation and management. This is aimed at increasing the accuracy of leprosy diagnosis. 


SCOPE AND COVERAGE:

Medical centers, regional, provincial, city. and district hospitals.


PROGRAM GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

GOAL:

To make leprosy services available in medical centers, regional, provincial, city, and district hospitals by the end of year 2000.


OBJECTIVES:

1. General Objective:  

To prepare hospitals in assuming its role in leprosy control and prevention.

Specific Objectives:

2.1 To strengthen the capability of hospitals in the diagnosis and management of leprosy
and its complications, and other common dermatological conditions.
2.2 To increase awareness of hospital staff on the policies and guidelines of the NLCP.


GENERAL GUIDELINES, POLICIES, AND PROCEDURES

A. Policy

Medical centers, regional, provincial, city, and district hospitals shall provide leprosy services, which includes diagnosis and treatment, management of complications, and physical and social rehabilitation. Information dissemination activities (health education and counseling) on leprosy shall also be provided to patients and their families, as well as the community.

B. Strategies to institutionalize leprosy services at hospitals

Capability building
1.1 Training
1.1.1 Physicians
1.1.1.1 Diagnosis and management of leprosy and its complications, and other common dermatological conditions.
1.1.1.2 Reconstructive surgery
1.1.2 Physical therapist on the prevention and management of disabilities.
1.1.3 Other hospital staff
1.2 Orientation of hospital staff
1.2.1 Policies and guidelines of the NLCP
1.2.2 Health education/counseling of patients, their families, and the community

2. Resource allocation and management

2.1 Provision of MDT blister pack supply to hospitals.
2.2 Procurement of Prednisone forlepra reactions
2.3 Provision at IEC materials

Management information system
3.1 Recording and Reporting
3.2 Referral system


POLICY ON PROCEDURES:

A. Definition of Terms:

1. Defaulter — a patient who has net collected treatment for 12 consecutive months.
2. Leprosy case — a person showing clinical signs of leprosy with or without bacteriological confirmation of the diagnosis and requiring chemotherapy.
3. Lost patient — a patient is considered lost if the patient does not report for treatment and repeated attempts to locate him has failed.
4. Multi-Drug Therapy (MDT) — the use of 2 or more drugs for the treatment of leprosy as recommended by the World Health Organization.
5. New Case of leprosy — a case of leprosy who has never been treated previously by a specific antibacterial drug for Mycobacterium leprae.
6. Validation Center - Refers to medical centers, regional, provincial, city and district hospital to include skin clinics and sanitaria providing leprosy services. 
7. Hospital Leprosy Medical Coordinator - refers to physicians trained in the diagnosis and management of leprosy and other common dermatological condition.

B. Procedure:

Recording of Cases

All diagnosed leprosy patients shall be recorded in appropriate NLCP forms (Patient‘s Record, Central Registry, and Drug Collection Chart).

Reporting of Cases

The designated Hospital Leprosy Medical Coordinator shall be responsible in submitting quarterly and annual statistical reports using the NLCP reporting forms. Medical centers, regional and other retained hospitals shall submit reports to the Regional Leprosy Program Coordinator while provincial hospitals and district hospitals, shall submit report to the Provincial Leprosy Program Coordinator. City Hospitals shall submit said reports to the Regional Leprosy Program Coordinator through the City Leprosy Program Coordinator

New cases shall be repaired by the hospital or health facility that provided the first dose of MDT to the patient. Patients who have transferred out, lost, or defaulted should not be included in reporting cases under treatment.

Referral of Patients to Rural Health Centers/Other hospital facilities:

Patients shall be given the option to continue their treatment either at the hospital or Rural Health Center at other health facilities, nearest their residence, through the use of NLCP referral forms. The referring physician shall be responsible in informing concerned coordinator (Regional/Provincial/City) as deemed appropriate, regarding the referred patient. It is the duty of said coordinator to follow—up the patient. The receiving health facility must return the acknowledgement form to the referring health facility. Other referral systems applicable to the local situation can be adapted.

Defaulter Retrieval

The Hospital shall inform concerned leprosy Program Coordinator who shall take the necessary action in locating leprosy patients missing regular treatment. Adequate efforts should be made to trace and retrieve defaulters and encourage them to return for assessment and treatment before removing their names from the list of active patients. As much as possible, patients should not be allowed to default.

IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURES, FUNCTIONS, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

A. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:

These duties and responsibilities are designed to facilitate the interfacing of hospitals with Rural Health Units in the implementation of leprosy control and prevention.

1. National Leprosy Control Program, Communicable Disease Control Service

1.1 Formulate plans, policies, and standards related in the control of leprosy nationwide.
1.2 Provide consultative and advisory services upon request. 
1.3 Coordinate training.
1.4 Ensure regular MDT blister pack supply through the Regional Health Offices.
1.5 Assess/evaluate implementation of leprosy activities in hospitals
1.6 Produce prototype IEC materials.
1.7 Assist in sourcing of funds for special projects in regions/provinces.

2. Regional Health Office.

2.1 Provide technical assistance, consultative, training and advisory services to hospitals.
2.2 Orient Hospital staff on the policies and guidelines of the NLCP.
2.3 Monitor implementation of leprosy activities in hospitals.
2.4 Request MDT blister pack supply from NLCP for distribution to hospitals.
2.5 Reproduce and provide information materials and NLCP forms for hospital use.
2.6 Coordinate leprosy activities in hospitals within the region.

3. Provincial/City Health Office

3.1 Supervise implementation of leprosy activities in hospitals within the province/city.
3.2 Provide technical support to hospital in the performance of leprosy services/activities.
3.3 Serve as center of health information on leprosy within the province/city.

4. Medical Canters, Regional/Provincial/City/District Hospitals and Sanitaria

4.1 Include leprosy program in the “Hospital as Center for Wellness Program.”
4.2 The Medical Centers, Regional/Provincial/City/District Hospitals and Sanitaria shall serve as:
4.2.1 center for the diagnosis and management of leprosy cases either on an outpatient or in-patient basis.
4.2.2 source of health information on leprosy.
4.3 The Medical Centers, Regional Hospitals, Sanitaria and selected Provincial Hospitals, in addition shall serve as:
4.3.1 center for physical rehabilitation of leprosy patients with disability
4.3.2 venue for reconstructive surgery for the physically disabled cases, depending on availability of surgical facilities and trained surgeon.
4.3.3 center for fitting and supply of prosthetic devices for the disabled.
4.4 Establish a registry of leprosy patients.
4.5 Conduct and serve as venue for training on leprosy and other common dermatological conditions.
4.6 Ensure examination of contacts of new cases.
4.7 Conduct studies and researches related to leprosy.
4.8 Participate in special case finding activities and other leprosy-related activities.
4.9 Submit quarterly report, using the appropriate reporting form, to program coordinators.
4.10 Allocate funds necessary to ensure the conduct of leprosy activities and the provision and maintenance of leprosy services in the hospital.

D. SPECIFIC HOSPITAL ACTIVITIES

1. Issue a hospital order designating a Hospital Leprosy Medical Coordinator who shall have the following responsibility: 
1.1 diagnose and manage leprosy and other common dermatological conditions
1.2 ensure proper recording and accurate reporting of cases
1.3 serve as resource person/trainor on leprosy
1.4 ensure availability of drugs and other necessary items for leprosy control work
1.5 coordinate hospital leprosy activities
2. Inform the hospital staff on the integration of leprosy services in the hospital.
2.1 Orient dermatology section/provincial/city/district hospital staff on the policies, standards, and guidelines of the NLCP.
3. Ensure the provision of skin consultation and counseling services for leprosy patients and their families at the Out Patient Department.
4. Send list of hospital staff for training to the RHO copy furnished the NLCP.
4.1 Provincial/City hospital staff for diagnosis and management of leprosy and other common dermatological conditions.
4.2 Surgeon for reconstructive surgery
4.3 Physical therapist for prevention of impairment and disability.
5. Ensure establishment of Rehabilitation Unit in all provincial hospitals in accordance with Republic Act No. 7277 Rule IV Section 5: Magna Carta for the differently abled persons and its implementing rules and regulations. 
6. Request MDT blister pack supply from the RHO.
7. Establish/Strengthen linkages with Non—government Organizations, other government agencies, and peoples organization with health related activities to support leprosy control work.

D. FUNDING:

1. Transportation expenses of provincial/city/district/city hospital staff for training, food and accommodation for the duration of the training relative to the implementation of this AO shall be shouldered by the NLCP/NGOs.
2. Reproduction and provision of information materials and NLCP forms shall be shouldered by the RHO.
3. Transportation and other incidental expenses incurred by the Regional Coordinator for the orientation of hospital staff shall be charged to the RHO.
4. The NLCP can be asked to provide funding assistance when necessary upon submission of a prefect proposal.

E. EFFECTIVITY:

This order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>