Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-80-80  

<date>12/04/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 163-A s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the operation of Hospital Maintenance Service For Luzon (HMS-L) situated at Bldg. 24, Department of Health, San Lazaro Compound, Sta. Cruz, Manila and defining its Relationship with other units in the Department.</subject>

<body>

Pursuant to the goals of the Department of Health as deﬁned by Executive Order No. 102, the following guidelines to govern the operations of the Hospital Maintenance Service for Luzon (HMS-L), as well as its relationship with other units of the Department of Health, is hereby promulgated.


1. Definition of Terms

1.1 “Hospital Maintenance Service for Luzon (HMS-L)” refers to the Technical Assistance Division of the former Hospital Maintenance Service whose supervision was transferred to the Department of Health - Center for Health Development for Metro Manila (DOH-CHD-Metro Manila) located at Bldg. 24, Department of Health, San Lazaro Cpd., Sta. Cruz, Manila.

1.2 “Head of Division” refers to the Head of the Hospital Maintenance Service for Luzon.


2. General Provisions

2.1 The HMS-L shall be primary responsible for carrying out health care equipment maintenance in all government hospitals and facilities in Regions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, CAR and Metro Manila.

2.2 The Head of Division shall be responsible for the operation of the Hospital Maintenance Service for Luzon. He shall be accountable to the Director of DOH-CHD-Metro Manila while maintaining an open line of communication
with the Directors of DOH-CHD Ilocos, CHD-Cagayan Valley, CHD-Central Luzon, CHD-Southern Tagalog, CHD-Bicol, and CHD-Cordillera.


3. Guidelines of Operation and Maintenance Strategies

3.1 Preventive Maintenance

3.1.1 A preventive maintenance program will be conducted in all government hospitals in Regions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, CAR and Metro Manila which aims to emphasize on the avoidance of health care equipment breakdown rather than repairing.
3.1.2 Service personnel to carry out the program shall be provided by HMS-L, together with the service personnel of the client hospital.
3.1.3 Per diem and transport fare shall be provided by DOH-CHD-Metro Manila.
3.1.4 Spare parts and consumables shall be provided by the client hospitals. The actual canvassing and purchasing may be done by HMS-L, in coordination with the client.

3.2 Corrective Maintenance

3.2.1 In-House

3.2.1.1 Client hospitals may bring the equipment for repair at the HMS-L workshop. It is recommended that the equipment be brought by the designated hospital equipment maintenance technician of the requesting hospital. Historical background and observation on the nature of defect shall be made available to the HMS-L technicians.

3.2.1.2 Report on the extent of damage and recommendations shall be forwarded to the requesting hospital within fifteen (15) working days upon receipt of the equipment.

3.2.1.3 If within three months the requesting hospital did not bring the necessary spare parts to put back the unit in its operational state, HMS-L shall inform them in writing to pull-out the unit from the workshop. This will minimize the space requirement for storage.

3.2.2 Reactive Maintenance

3.2.2.1 Request for health care equipment repair shall be addressed to: The Director, DOH-Center for Health Development for Metro Manila, Department of Health, Manila. The request shall state the type, brand, model, serial number and brief observation or complaint about the equipment.

3.2.2.2 Traveling expenses, per diems, and cost of spare parts shall be borne by the requesting hospital. It should be clearly stated in the request that the hospital will pay for all the required travelling allowances. Travel will only commence once the needed funding is provided by the client hospital.

3.3 Training of health care equipment users and maintenance staff

3.3.1 Informal training of users on proper operation and simple preventive maintenance is part of the preventive maintenance program and shall be done on site.

3.3.2 Technician’s training can be an on-the—job type training and shall be done at the HMS-L workshop. Travelling expenses and per diems of the trainee shall be borne by the sending hospital. Request for this kind of training shall be addressed to the Director, DOH-Center for Health-Development for Metro Manila. 

3.3.3 HMS-L shall prepare schedule of training courses for equipment users and maintenance staff. Resource persons can be coordinated with the Bureau of Health Devices and Technology.

3.4 Research

3.4.1 Research shall be an integral responsibility of HMS-L.


4. Relationships

The Hospital Maintenance Service for Luzon shall be organizationally attached as a Division to the DOH-CHD-Metro Manila. The following relationship guidelines shall govern:

4.1 With Department of Health-Center for Health Development for Metro Manila (DOH-CHD-Metro Manila)

4.1.1 The Director, DOH-Center for Health Development for Metro Manila shall exercise general supervision over HMS-L

4.1.2 The DOH-CHD-Metro Manila shall provide administrative support services to HMS-L.

4.1.3 The Director, DOH-CHD-Metro Manila, shall be in authority to issue travel orders of HMS-L personnel who will implement the different maintenance strategies in Regions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, CAR and Metro Manila.

4.1.4 HMS-L shall provide the Director, DOH-CHD-Metro Manila with monthly projected activities, weekly accomplishment report of the division and other information as required.

4.1.5 HMS—L shall adhere to the policies of DOH-CHD-Metro Manila.

4.2 With the DOH — CHDs - Ilocos, Cagayan Valley, Central Luzon, Southern Tagalog, Cordillera; Medical Centers, Specialty and Special Hospitals in Metro Manila; and all government hospitals and facilities in Regions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, CAR and Metro Manila.

4.2.1 HMS—L shall be responsible for providing technical assistance in the upkeep of facilities and health care equipment of government hospitals and facilities in the aforementioned regions.

4.2.2 HMS-L shall treat all hospitals in the aforementioned regions equitably.

4.2.3 Government hospitals and facilities in the aforementioned regions shall have equal access to HMS—L in requesting assistance for the maintenance of health care equipment.

4.3 With Bureau of Health Devices and Technology

4.3.1 The Bureau of Health Devices and Technology shall provide resource persons for the training programs of HMS-L upon request.

4.3.2 The Bureau of Health Devices and Technology shall provide consultative and advisory services to HMS-L in terms of equipment maintenance management. 

This order shall take effect immediately.

 
</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
