Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Telephone: 711-9502/03, 743-83-01 loc 1125, 1126

<date>04/10/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 34-A s, 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Adolescent and Youth Health(AYH) Policy</subject>

<body>

I. Background / Rationale

Currently, health programs for young children (0—5) have been developed and are being implemented successfully throughout the country. In 1998, the Health Department identified the need to develop a health program to address the needs of the adolescents and youth who currently constitute 40% of the entire population. The challenges in this age group are numerous since this is the stage where experimentation and unhealthy behaviors and habits start eventually leading to chronic illnesses and disability. There is therefore an urgent need, to develop a comprehensive program to meet the need of this special population group. 

Adolescence and youth is not just a transitional stage of life between childhood and adulthood. These are biological, social physical and emotional milestone specific to the age group that are critical to maturation. The World Health Organization defines an adolescent as one belonging to ages 10-19 while youth covers the period 15—24 years old. The definition of the parameters of adolescence are problematic, since children are introduced early to adult social and economic responsibilities, with little transition between childhood and adulthood.

The stage of adolescence and youth is marked by rapid changes in the physical, physiological, emotional and social development of the individual. Physically, there is a spurt of  growth marked by changes in size and shape of the body. Psychosocially, the individual acquires a sense of identity, drawing apart from the elders with the developing intense relationship with peers and interest in major life decisions (eg. search for a mate or job). An important feature of this stage is curiosity and the initiation of risk behavior.

During this stage of life, confusion, conflicts and disagreements with parents usually occur and if not properly handled may lead to maladaptation and anti — social behavior. Likewise, due to accessibility of transport, the migration of rural youth to highly urbanized areas has become common. The cultural shock encountered by these youth and the lack of necessary skills and experience to cope with complex situations may result in further isolation.

To address this emerging concerns, the Department of Health is creating the Adolescent and Youth Health Sub—Program under the Program for Childrens Health Cluster for Family Health.


II. Adolescent and Youth Health Framework:

Vision: Well-informed, empowered, responsible and healthy adolescents and youth

Mission: Ensure that all adolescents and youth have access to quality comprehensive health care and services in an adolescent and youth-friendly environment.

Goals:

* Healthy development and reproduction maturation

* Healthy lifestyles to avoid illness / diseases / injuries / disabilities

* Information, education, counseling care, and rehabilitation for common health problems

* Healthy adolescents and youthfriendly settings


General Objectives:

To institutionalize a comprehensive program for the health of adolescents and youth.


Health Objectives:

* Reduce morbidity and mortality among adolescents and youth
* Eliminate unwanted pregnancy / abortion / STIs
* Eliminate disabilities and accidents → drug/substance abuse; abusive/destructive behaviors
* Promote general health and development
* Provide quality adolescent and youth -friendly health programs and services.


III. Guidelines and Procedures:

General:

1. The following WHO definition shall be adopted:

Adolescent: 	10-19 years old
Youth: 		15-24 years old
Young people: 	10-24 years old

2. Adolescents and youth are the priority target group of the program. 
* This stage is a time of experimentation and uncertainty that may place them at risk of health related problems which may have lifelong effects.

3. The priority activity shall focused on the prevention of health risk and promotion of healthy activities.
* This should include information and services that will improve their reproductive health, nutrition, immunity from common illnesses, psychosocial health, oral health, sexual health and environmental safety.

4. Provision of a safe environment
* Parents and adults should exert all efforts to create a safe environment and protect adolescents and youths from all type of exploitation such as exposure to cigarette smoke, unhealthy food (empty calorie-food), abuse by people with authority over them such as relatives, school personnel, media and advertising that emphasizes sex and violence.

5. The family shall be the most important source of basic knowledge, behavior, attitude and skills of adolescents and youth health.

6. The concerned sectors such as teachers, counselors, health providers, social workers, religious leaders, employers, the community and others should support the family in caring for adolescents and youth to prepare them in making good health decisions.

7. Health care services should be accessible and available at all times.
* These should be in location where they can easily go to or in places where they are usually found such as the schools, shopping malls, teen-age "hang—outs", movie houses, sports centers and in hospitals where they can avail of higher level of care.

* Selected RHUs with well-trained personnel on adolescent and youth health shall also provide adolescent services.

8. Health care services should be integrated at the client level and therefore must be multi-sectoral. 
* Most adolescent and youth concerns are interrelated in nature and must be responded within a comprehensive program. This should include intervention to address, social, cultural, spiritual and economic aspects of health care.

9. Special services for special health problems and conditions such as disability, rape and abuse victims should be also made available. This shall include medical, legal, and rehabilitation services as well as social, legal and support services.

10. Privacy and confidentiality should be preserved at all times when dealing with adolescent problems.
* Confidentiality will build trust of the adolescents and will also protect them from the unnecessary peer pressure and embarassment.

11. The adolescents and youth should be actively involved in the planning and development and implementation of health programs and services in their respective area.
* They should be given enough time to process and discuss the concepts among themselves so that they reach the proper decisions on the methods and approaches that would best suit their interest and frame of mind.

12. Monitoring and evaluation of the availability and effectivity of services shall be conducted regularly to further enhance the quality of programs and services.

13. Health Care Financing scheme shall be organized, developed and maintained to support the institutionalization of adolescent and youth health care and services.

14. The DOH—FHC should designate a Sub—Program—Coordinator for AYH.

Specific Guidelines:

1. Adolescents and youth shall be encouraged to promote the health of their peers, younger children and adults.

2. The promotion of mental health among adolescent and youth will be _________ including the development of skills and competencies in stress management.

3. The DOH in close partnership with DECS organize a working group to update , review and evaluate the schools health program.

4. All DOH hospitals and facilities shall provide a adolescent and youth - friendly designated area for its program.

5. A comprehensive quality health care services should be provided to all adolescents and youth resources of ethnic, cultural, religious, social, political affiliation. Trained, health care providers such as doctors dentist, nurses, social workers, shall observe the principles of privacy and confidentiality. These services should also be gender sensitive.

Description of the Adolescent and Youth - Friendly Designated Area.

A. All DOH facilities should:

* Have a trained health care provider and access to on-call specialists for special needs
* Have comfortable room where privacy can be observed
* Have a small table and 2-3 chairs available
* Have a safety cabinet where records will be kept.
* Minimize unnecessary furnishings such as office table, telephone and other physical barriers and distractions especially during the counseling session.
* Have easy accessibility from outside the hospital or separate entrance and waiting areas from other patients/ clients. A separate room from the hospital building would be ideal..
* Be equipped with necessary logistics and supplies.
* Have alternative promotional IEC materials posted on the wall and take home reading materials
* open for 24 hours.

B. One stop shop Adolescent and Youth Health Center shall be accredited by DOH ( Malls, Teen—age hangouts/ Tambayan, etc) based on fulfillment of the following basic requisites:

* supervised by a professional care giver (psychologist, psychiatrist, doctor, nurse, midwife or any professional trained in counseling)
* available trained peer counsellors and professionals or on call professional care giver
* available recreational activities like video equipment, computers, games, etc., and reading material
* equipped with necessary logistics and supplies
* comfortable room where privacy can be observed
* a small table and 2—3 chairs available
* unnecessary furnishing such as office table, telephone etc. must be avoided to minimize physical barriers and distractions especially during the counselling session.
* safety cabinet where records will be kept.
* open until 8:00 PM.

C. RHU/ BHS should :

* Rural health midwives who shall screen and refer adolescents in the proper level of care
* nurses and doctors who shall screen and provide basic intervention and refer client when necessary to higher level of care
* records that must be kept confidential.
* The following features:
- a counselling room / area where privacy and confidentiality will be ensured. It must be free from physical barriers like office table, telephone, etc. to minimize and avoid distractions
- attractive promotional IEC materials posted on the wall and take home reading materials
- available trained professional health care providers
- equipped with necessary logistics and supplies
- open until 5 PM.


IV. Implementing Mechanism:

1. National Level

The DOH shall act as. the lead agency in the promotion of Adolescent and Youth Health. Specifically, the Childrens Health Program will be the core health program structure that will undertake the development, monitoring and evaluation of the national AYHP strategy within the Family Health Cluster.
The FHC shall convene a Technical Working Group on AYHP to be composed of the following:

Chair: 		Head, FHC
Members: 	Focal Person, MCHS
		Focal Person, FPS
		Focal Person, Nutrition Service
		Focal Person, NASPCP
		Focal Person, NCDCS
		Focal Person, Dental Health Service
		Focal Person, WHDP
		Focal Person, PIHES
		Retained Hospital
		NGO
		Other GOs and partner agencies with Adolescent and Youth Concerns

The Technical Working Group will develop a technical framework for specific projects under the sub—program and will review and recommend priorities based on strategic opportunities .

2. Regional Health System:

The Centers for Health and Development (CHD) in various regions of the country will be the sub—national structures that will assist in the implementation of AH strategy and its operating policies. All DOH Retained Hospital shall make Adolescent and Youth Health care as an integral part of hospital services.
The CHD shall likewise organize a Regional TWG, the composition of which will be parallel to that of the national TWG.

3. Human Resource Development:

The following shall be trained / oriented in Adolescent and youth Health:
1. Designated DOH staff ( National and Regional)
2. Designated staff of all retained DOH hospitals
3. Designated RHU / BHS staff
4. Other agencies ( GOs, NGOs etc.) with adolescent and youth concerns
5. Parents, peers, community, etc.
6. Representative from Sangunian kabataan
7. School teachers and counsellors

4. Logistic support:

The DOH national and regional office shall include in their budget sufficient allocation for adolescent and youth health services and activities to ensure sustainability.
All DOH units shall encourage funding support from different agencies, organization both local and international agency.

5. Social Mobilization and IEC:

This shall be a responsibility of all DOH units. Participation of other agencies ( GOs, NGOs and youth themselves) is encouraged.

6. Referral system: 

A referral system should be established at all levels. This shall follow the District Health System model and shall conform with provisions of EO 205 on establishing inter-local health zones.

7. Networking:

The Center for Family Health is tasked to spearhead the operationalization of the AYH and establish the necessary linkages with other services, other GOs, NGOs, academe, media and other private institutions including local and foreign donor agencies.

8. Database
The Adolescent and Youth Health Sub-Program will ensure the generation and utilization of data on adolescent and youth for project development, program planning, monitoring and evaluation.

9. Quality Assurance Program:

The Adolescent and Youth Health Program (AYHP), in all aspects of implementation, shall apply the standards and concepts set by the Sentrong Sigla to ensure quality health services. The Adolescent and Youth Health (AYH) TWG, shall therefore coordinate closely with the Sentrong Sigla Steering Committee and its 4 pillars to ensure that quality standards are developed and updated to conform with program structures and directions.


V. Resource Mobilization / Institutionalization:

Multisectoral participation in resource mobilization and rational budget setting for adolescent health promotion are the key to institutionalization of Adolescent and Youth Health (AYH). Efforts must be directed to tapping both public and private sectors for investments.

The DOH-CFH shall allocate 10-20% of its funds to AYH annually.

Local Health Financing:

As stated in the HSRA, the Phil. Health Insurance Corporation will be the key partner to initiate efforts for investing in AYH. Tapping other sources for implementation of AYH shall be a major activity for the cluster particularly private sector or non-government sources.

VI. Effectivity:

This order shall take effect immediately upon its approval and signing by the Secretary of Health.


</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ JR., MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
