Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>05/17/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 51 s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Job Rotation Program of the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>

I. Rationale:

The Department of Health (DOH), in line with a decentralized set-up, has redirected its functions and operations. To keep attuned to these changing roles, functions and organizational processes, the Department saw the need to enhance work experience of its human resource to prepare them for a diversified function.

In view of this, the Health Manpower Development and Training Service, (HMDTS) the human resource development arm of the DOH mandated to provide, develop and maintain an adequate and effective supply of qualified personnel to manage and achieve the Department’s vision, has conceived a Job Rotation Program to serve as an area of training which will fulfill the need of the DOH personnel and its counterpart at the local government level.



II. Objective:

To enrich work experience of DOH personnel for more effective job performance.


III. Target health human resource:

- Division Chief Level and Technical Staff involved in implementing a program/project either at the National, Regional or LGU level

- Administrative support personnel whose job also involves consolidation of national and regional world outputs

- Hospital personnel with supervisor function and those involved in developing the public health units of hospitals


IV. Duration/Frequency

The rotation shall be from one (1) week to one (1) month. Rotation of more than a month may be approved depending on nature of work and period of time the person can be dispensed with by the mother unit.

Frequency of rotation shall depend on the needs of the staff.


V. Program Content

5.1 Central office personnel shall rotate to regional or local government offices to observe implementation of the program/projeot they are involved in or to provide technical assistance to specific regional programs and projects.

5.2 Regional office personnel shall rotate to:

- the national office to observe and to contribute, from an implementor’s perspective, to management, policy development; and program/project development, monitoring and evaluation.

— the LGUs to serve as resource persons on local/project design and implementation, and

- other regions to observe collaboration centers within regions.

5.3 LGU personnel shall rotate to the national or regional offices to observe management, policy development, program/project development, monitoring and evaluation

5.4 Hospital personnel shall rotate to national, regional or local government offices to observe public health program/project design, planning and implementation.


VI. Implementing Guidelines:

6.1 For Central Office, Regional or LGU Personnel Rotating in Regions:

— Rotator from the department shall be allowed a per diem of Php 300 per day charged to sending agency. For rotators from LGUs,
per diem shall be charged to the Health Human Resource (HHR) Fund Assistance of HMDTS depending on availability of funds.

- The Regional Offices shall arrange for accommodations of rotators preferrably at the training center.

- The concerned office shall identify the staff who shall be sent to attend said program.

— Transporation expenses shall he charged to sending agency.

- Rotators shall be directly supervised by the Regional Director.

- Regions through the HRD Unit shall develop a program of activity for each rotation.

— Rotators shall submit a report to cover observations, learnings and recommendations on area of rotation to the
Regional Director concerned, Service Director concerned and HMDTS.

6.2 For Regional Personnel Rotating in the Central Office

- Rotator from the Regional Office shall be allowed a per diem of Php 300 per day charged to sending agency.

— Receiving Office shall arrange for accommodation of rotator either at the office itself or a common room for rotators to be
identified by HMDTS.

- The concerned office shall identify the staff who shall be sent to attend said program.

— Transportation expense shall be charged to sending agency.

- Rotator shall be directly supervised by the Service Director concerned.

— HMDTS shall develop a program of activity for each rotation.

- Rotators shall submit a report to cover observations, learnings and recommendations on area of rotation to the Regional Director and to Service Director concerned and HMDTS

6.3 For LGU personnel rotating to National or Regional Offices:

— At the Central Office, receiving office shall arrange for accommodation of rotator, if requested.

- The concerned office shall identify the staff who shall be sent to attend said program

- Transporation expense shall be charged to sending agency.

- Rotators shall be directly supervised by the Service Director concerned at the central office. In the regions, rotators shall be directly under the Regional Director.

- HMDTS/HMDTD shall be in charge of developing the program of activity for each rotation.


VII. Others: — Rotators shall have additional points for promotion as determined by the Administrative Service.


VII. Effectivity:

This Program shall be implemented by the HMDTS/HMDTD and shall take effect upon date of signing.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>