Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue 
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Tel. No. 711-95-02/711-95-03

<date>07/20/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 88 s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines for Retooling and Retraining</subject>

<body>

INTRODUCTION

Relative to the approved organizational and new staffing pattern per approved DOH Rationalization and Streamlining Plan, the following guidelines shall govern the process and conduct of training and other related activities immediately after the selection, placement and deployment process has been initiated or completed in the Department of Health.


COVERAGE

All employees of the Department of Health regardless of rank, position, and station or place of assignment shall be governed by this order. Human Resource Development Units in the Centers for Health Development are authorized to formulate or complement whatever is not covered in these guidelines.


PROCESS


A. Personnel Skills Assessment and Evaluation

1. The Administrative Service in coordination with the HMDTS shall provide all offices in the Central Office with the educational and skill requirements for each of the approved position titles. Qualification standards and requirements shall be secured from the Civil Service Commission

2. HMDTS shall assist all offices in the Central Office in the conduct of the Training Needs Assessment (TNA). The HRD units shall initiate the conduct of the TNA in the Centers for Health Development

3. Results of the TNA shall be submitted to HMDTS or HRD units.

4. HMDTS/HRD units shall develop the overall Retooling and Retraining Plan which shall include strategies of continuing education and organization development interventions, such as; job rotation, observation visits, distance education, teambuilding. The Retooling Plan shall follow the attached format (Annex A). 

The Retooling Plan of the Centers for Health Development shall be submitted to HMDTS for consolidation and possible assistance, if necessary

5. HMDTS/HRD units shall make the necessary arrangements with offices/agencies involved in the Retooling Plan

6. HMDTS/HRD units shall implement the plan.


B. Organization and Setting of Priority Courses/Training Programs

1. The HMDTS shall prioritize training courses/programs that will support and strengthen the key reform areas of the Health Sector Reform Agenda. Training programs shall provide for skills and expertise in areas specified in Annex B.

2. HMDTS/HRD units shall arrange with relevant training institutions such as academic institutions, hospitals for the conduct of the necessary courses and programs

3. HMDTS/HRD units shall provide a schedule of all training courses and programs immediately upon completion of the selection/placement process. Reprogramming or rescheduling of the courses/programs shall be done by HMDTS as may be necessary

4. The heads of offices, professional groups and other stakeholders shall be consuLted in the formulation of the training course agenda. This shall be reviewed every year for relevance and appropriateness

5. HMDTS/HRD units shall evaluate the Standards, Competence and expertise of academic institutions and training agencies before contract signing and agreement is made

6. HMDTS shall assist Centers for Health Development and hospitals in terms of coordination and linkages with national training institutions and agencies with expertise in formulation and provision of special training programs.


C. Monitoring and Evaluation

1. Academic institutions and-training agencies contracted for the training courses or programs shall be required to submit an evaluation report of the trainees performance. The heads of offices shall be provided with this report for their own performance evaluation ends.

The Administrative Service shall be provided with a copy of the report and shall use this as one of the basis for the overall performance evaluation of the employee.

2. The Administrative Service in coordination with HMDTS shall formulate an evaluation program to determine the post training performance of employees who have undergone retraining/retooling courses/programs

3. A year and evaluation shall be done by the HMDTS/HRD units for all the programmed courses and training programs undertaken noting the following criteria:

- conduct and organization of the training courses and programs by contracted institutions and agencies

- content and relevance of training courses and programs to the thrusts of the Department of Health and the whole health sector

- feedback from participants and facilitators alike as to style of presentations, facilitation, and gains/lessons from the whole training course program

4. HMDTS/HRD unit shall monitor all training courses and shall submit an evaluation report to the immediate head

5. Institutions and agencies contracted for the training courses shall also be evaluated at the end of the year as to their competence, track record, commitment and relevance


COORDINATING AND IMPLEMENTING MECHANISMS

At the Central Office, the HMDTS shall coordinate closely with the Administrative and Finance Service and all other offices in the Department in the formulation of the training plan for the newly organized staff of the Department of Health. It shall also secure the assistance of other government agencies such as the Civil Service Commission, Professional Regulations Commission, CHED, Department of Education and Culture and other agencies such as academic institutions or sshools and professional experts. Assistance may come by way of: facilitation, programming, formulation/clarification of standards and requirements, etc.

In the Centers for Health Development, the HRD units shall assume these functions and request Central Office for assistance.

HMDTS/HRD units shall serve as the clearing house of all retraining/retooling courses or any continuing education courses to be conducted in the Department.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR. M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. ANNEX B

 

1. ' Corporate HospitalSe't-vup

2. _ Leadership overLocal Health Systems
3. Integrative Approach to Health Promotion "and Disease Prevention

I 4. I Networking

. 5. Human Resource Planning _‘ I
6. Financial Management
7. . Social Health Insurance

8. _ ' Regulation

