Republic of the Philippines
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Department of Health
Manila

<date>07/10/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 79 s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: SAFE MOTHERHOOD POLICY</subject>

<body>

1. RATIONALE

WHO reports that in 1996, approximately 150 million women in the developing countries will become pregnant annually, of which, 7 million will result to stillbirths or infant deaths in the first week of life from pregnancy-related complications. Reports
further show that Southeastern and Southern Asia contribute 55% (323, 000 out of 600,000) of the maternal deaths of the world.

In the Philippines, women in the reproductive age group (15-44 y.o.) is estimated to be 14 million. Nine (9) million of these are either married or have partners of which 6 million is considered to be “high risk” should they become pregnant as they are either too young (less than 18 years old ) or too old (more than 35 years old ); have had four or more pregnancies; have too close or unspaced pregnancies (less than 15 months) and are concurrently ill.

Based on a total fertility rate (TFR) of 3.7% in 1998, an estimate of 2.3 million Filipino women are expected to become pregnant per year. Of these, roughly 2 million will give birth. The 1998 National Demographic Health Survey (NDHS) shows that 65.5% of these women deliver at home; only 57% of all deliveries are either attended by doctors, nurses or midwives while 43% are attended by traditional birth attendants or relatives.

The Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) based on the 1998 NDHS was 172 per 100,000 livebirths or a total of 3,614 maternal deaths per year or 10 mothers dying per day due to pregnancy related complication. Post partum hemorrhage is the leading cause of maternal death followed by hypertensive complications, sepsis and abortion. Perinatal Death Rate (PDR) is 18 per 1000 live births. Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) is 36 per 1000 livebirths, very much higher than neighbor countries Malaysia and Singapore with 9.1 per 1000 livebirths & 4.1 per 1000 livebirths, respectively.


2. GUIDING PRINCIPLES

The Philippines is committed to pursuing the principles enunciated in the Cairo and Beijing conferences on Population and Women’s, respectively, for the promotion of safe motherhood and women's health, and to ensure healthy newborns.

The following principles form the basis for the programming for the reduction of maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity in the country:
* Promotion of women’s rights and gender-sensitivity
* Access to quality health and nutrition services
* Focusing on health promotion, education and advocacy
* Establishing linkages and developing collaboration to ensure sustainability
* Mobilizing families and communities to address family planning and maternal and newborn-care
* Empowering communities to recognize and correct gender discrimination and prevent violent and abusive behavior towards women and girls
* Reporting and reviewing all maternal deaths

At threshold of the new millenium, the Philippines is restating its commitment to the aspiration of a healthy nation through a more vibrant and vigorous Safe Motherhood Initiatives.


3. GOAL:

To ensure safe motherhood & healthy newborns.

General Objective:

Reduction of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality.

Specific Objectives:

The following specific objectives to ensure safe motherhood & healthy newborn are lifted from National Objectives for Health;

1. Reduce maternal mortality ratio to 86 deaths per 100,000 livebirths by year 2004
(Baseline 172 deaths per 100,000 live births in 1998, NDHS)
2. Reduce the proportion of LBW to 12% of total live birth.
(Baseline 16.6 percent in 1998 NDHS, 1997 FHSIS) 
3. Reduce mortality rate among neonates to 3.8 deaths per 1,000 live births.
(Baseline 7.8/ 1,000 livebirths in PHS 1994)


4. COVERAGE & SCOPE

This is a multi—level, multi—sectoral technical guidelines/ prescriptions on Safe motherhood and newborn care. Target coverage of services are all women of reproductive age group (15- 44 y.o.). Pregnancy is a special condition needing special caring / attention not withstanding the fact that some of the pregnant women maybe in need of higher level of emergency obstetric care at anytime before, during and after delivery. Furthermore, attention should be given to indigenous women, women among highly marginalized groups (fisherfolks, farmers, urban slums, etc.) and teenage/ adolescent groups. Approaches/ strategies should be specific/ culture—based and gender—sensitive.

All newborns up to 28 days of life are also target of interventions and services under this policy. 


5. GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES : 

I. ENSURING QUALITY MATERNAL & NEWBORN CARE

Good quality maternal and newborn health services: 
* Are accessible and available as close as possible to where the women live, and at the lowest possible facility that can provide the services safely and effectively.
* Are acceptable to potential users and responsive to local cultural and social norms, such as preferences for privacy, confidentiality and care by female health workers.
* Have on hand all essential supplies and equipment; 
* Provide comprehensive care and linkages to other reproductive health services;
* Provide for continuity of care and follow-up;
* Are staffed technically competent health care providers who rely on clear guidelines/protocols for treatment;
* Are staffed by workers who provide respectful and non-judgmental care that is responsive to women’s needs;
* Involve the client in decision making, and see clients as partners in health care and active participants in protecting their own health; and
* Offer economic and social support to health care providers that enable them to do the best job they can;
* Encourage partner as well as family and community involvement in pre-natal and post natal services.

Elements of Quality Maternal and Newborn Care

A. Prenatal

Pregnant Women should have at least four (4) pre-natal visits for;

* Health promotion: advice on nutrition (e.g. iodized salt utilization) and health care, breastfeeding, newborn care as well as counseling to alert women to danger signs and help plan for birth ;
* Assessment: history taking, physical examination and screening tests like hemoglobin/ hematocrit determination, urinalysis using the Home Based Mother’s Record (HBMR), dental check-up and prophylaxis
* Prevention: Tetanus Toxoid immunization, Micronutrient supplementation (low-dose Vit. A, Multiple micronutrient supplementation, Ferrous sulfate) and early detection and management of complications.
* Treatment: Management of sexually transmitted infections, anemia, toxemia or other risk conditions.

B. Natal/ Delivery Care

All Deliveries should be attended by a “skilled attendant" and is within 2 hours from a first level referral or well-equipped hospital that can handle emergency obstetric cases and should have the following services:

* Provide good "quality care that is hygienic, safe and sympathetic on an on-going basis.
* Recognizes and manage complications, including instituting life-saving measures for mother and baby when called for.
* Monitor progress of labor using partograph
* Refer promptly and safely when higher—level care is needed
* Ensure the support/ presence of husband/ partner

A skilled attendant (doctor, nurse, midwife or TBA) is deﬁned as one with the training and educational background or accredited by the DOH to perform safe and clean deliveries.


C. Postpartum and Newborn Care

The post-partum mother together with her newborn should have at least 2 post — partum visits one month apart for the following services:

* Newborn screening for 6 congenital metabolic disorder
* Apgar scoring, proper cord care
* Identification and management of problems in mothers and newborn in the 1st 24 hours
* Immediate and safe referral of cases needing higher level care
* Initiate exclusive breastfeeding
* Counseling and health promotion on exclusive breastfeeding, follow-up immunization, family planning, micronutrient supplementation, personal hygiene and care of newborn.
* BCG immunization and complete assessment of the newborn using Growth Monitoring Chart (GMC)


II. CAPABILITY & CAPACITY BUILDING

Training should be based on the need of women, the family and community utilizing the competency-based approach. Furthermore, improving the capability of all health workers who provide health care services for women of reproductive age, must be complemented by education of the women, the family and the community. The effectiveness of all strategies and activities for safe motherhood rest on how we can mobilize and motivate the women together with their families and the community to take care of themselves and to avail of all the services from competent caring gender sensitive health care providers.


III. SOCIAL MOBILIZATION

Social Mobilization is a dynamic process of generating and sustaining the active and coordinated participation of all sectors at various levels to facilitate and accelerate the improvement of the situation of children, women and other vulnerable groups.

The elements of this strategy are; advocacy, information, education and communication (IEC), networking, alliance building and programme sustainability.

The integration of a maternal and health care package into the Philippine Social Health Insurance scheme and/ or the establishment of community-based health care financing projects/ programs will contribute greatly in ensuring that basic essential maternal and newborn care and emergency obstetric care are made available at any levels of the health care delivery system.

Continuous coordination with legislative branch of government to operationalize commitment of government for Safe Motherhood and Newborn
Care.

Maintain and strengthen network with national and international funding donors for financial/ logistical support/ assistance. 


IV. COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The community should have a clear vision and goal for women as partners both in the family life and development. Mobilizing the community especially women as partners for Safe Motherhood is essential since strategies and approaches for improving the well-being of mothers can work best when there is effective community participation. Community participation is a process whereby women, their families and communities organize themselves for problem-solving, formulating ideas, technologies and approaches. Discussion and decision-making for action based on available options is an important strategy. Collectively implement projects/ activities which are culture-sensitive, environment friendly and technologically sound is essential Monitoring of programme and assessing its impact to women/ children/ family/ community must be undertaken and community participation with service providers.


V. MONITORING & EVALUATION 

Conduct regular monitoring, evaluation and reflection and assessment of best practices to heighten the women’s and community's consciousness on safe motherhood and generate commitment to address violence against women in the home, community and workplace.

Maternal death reviews must be conducted in all maternal deaths regardless of the place of occurrence. Furthermore, maternal and perinatal disabilities/ deaths must be reported and line listed at the health facility.


VI. RESEARCH AND DOCUMENTATION

Research on important aspect & other emerging issues which impact on maternal health and survival will be encouraged, promoted and supported. The  goal is to promote increased investments in health research in general and specifically on issues around safe motherhood. This may encompass knowledge, attitude and practices on one hand to effectiveness and efficiency of program strategies, interventions and activities on the other.

Documentation of traditional/ indigenous practices will be pursued as well as documentation of successful and doable initiatives will be promoted to facilitate sharing of lessons as well as replication and scaling up of cost-effective, technologically-sound interventions.


6. IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM

A. National Level

All DOH bureaus, centers, programs & projects delivering safe motherhood services will be integrated within the Center for Disease Prevention & Control under the Health Operations Cluster. The Center for Family Health (CFH) takes overall responsibility for policy development, standard setting, coordination and integration of all activities. This office is also tasked to ensure the all safe motherhood services are given importance in terms of technical, logistics and other support systems.

B. National Level

The Center for Family Health shall convene Technical Working Group on Safe Motherhood to be composed of the following:

Chair: 		Head, Center for Family Health
Co— Chair: 	Focal Person, Women’s Health & Development
		Focal Person, Child-Health & Development
		Focal Person, Reproductive Health
		Focal Person, Nutrition
		Focal Person, Dental Health
		Focal Person, Center for Health Promotion
		Representative from:
			External Affairs Cluster
			Uniﬁed PMO
			Local Health Assistance Cluster 
			Retained Hospital
			NGO 
			Other GOs & partner agencies on Safe Motherhood Concerns
			Foreign Assisted Projects: UNICEF, UNFPA

The TWG will develop a Technical Framework for Safe Motherhood, recommend strategies to immediately and aggressively address maternal mortality and morbidity and recommend a program design to integrate public and hospital intervention for safe motherhood. 

The TWG shall always be represented in the National Reproductive Health Management Committee to ensure integration and consistency in policies across all ten RH elements. Functions composition and role of the RH
Management Committee is reflected in A.O. 43 s. 2000

C. Support Services

Other support services include: Human Resource Development Institute, Bureau of Local Health Development, National Epidemiology Center, Health Policy and Planning Institute, Bureau of Health Facilities and Services, Center for Health Promotion, Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) and projects which may be called to provide assistance to the Technical Working Group as the need arises.

D. Regional Health System

The Centers for Health Development are directed to revitalize / utilize existing Regional Safe Motherhood Management Committees. These committees shall be integrated into the newly organize Reproductive Health (RH) Task Force at the Regional level. The Regional RH Task Force shall oversee the Safe Motherhood initiatives of local governments within the catchment of the Center for Health Development. The Task Force shall be chaired by the Head of the Health Operations Cluster and Membership should follow the composition of the
National RH Management Committee as contained in A.O. #43 s. 2000.

8. QUALITY ASSURANCE

All standards and concepts to ensure quality health services set by the Sentrong Sigla shall be applied to all aspects of safe motherhood implementation. 

7. FUNDING

Funding Support of safe motherhood activities will be lodged primarily in the Center for Family health with augmentation from other concerned bureaus and centers. The gender and development (GAD) budget shall be utilized for safe motherhood implementation at all levels: national, regional and local as well as from specific FAPS in the targeted areas. 

8. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect within 15 days frOm publication in an official gazette.

 

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>