Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY.
M a n i l a

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ.
MANILA, PHILIPPINES

<date>09/04/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 107 s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Amendment/Addendum to AO 51 Sec. 9.1, 9.3, 9.4 and 10.2 s 1988. Reconstitution and Strengthening of the Membership of theTherapeutic Committee at the Centers for Health Development, Special Hospitals, National Medical Centers, Regional Medical Centers, Regional Hospitals and Sanitaria.</subject>

<body>   

In line with the thrust of the Department to strengthen existing Therapeutics Committees, AO 51 under Sections 9.1, 9.3, 9.4 and 10.2 is hereby amended as follows:

9.1 Requirement:

In addition, Therapeutics Committees shall be a requirement for licensing of hospitals and other health facilities.

9.3 Composition:

In line with the thrust of the Department to strengthen existing Therapeutics Committees, AO 51 under Sections 9.1, 9.3, 9.4 and 10.2 is hereby amended as follows:

9.3.2 The members of the hospital therapeutics committee shall be designated by the head of the agency and shall be composed of technical experts from the different major clinical departments (surgery, ob-gyne, medicine and pediatrics) and pharmacy who will be the regular members with voting priveleges. Ex-ofﬁcio or non- voting members shall be the chief nurse, the administrator and medical officer from the Philippine Health Insurance (PHIC) or their duly designated representatives. The chief
nurse shall provide inputs on drug usage problems encountered in the delivery of health services.

It is imperative that the membership be restricted manly to technical experts who will handle sensitive matters regarding selection, evaluation and utilization of drugs and medicines.

9.3.6 The regional therapeutics committee shall consist of DOH related Program Coordinators in each region, Food and Drug Regulation Officers (FDROs) and technical experts coming from the different retained hospitals. The regional Therapeutics Committee shall consist of a minimum of five (5) and a maximum of seven (7) members.

To assist the committee, the Director may contract a pharmacologist to serve as consultant.

9.3.7 The duration of regular membership shall preferably be on a staggered basis, such that half of the members will be appointed every two (2) years. 

Members of the PBAC or PBAC related committees and other ﬁnance/budget units are not eligible to be members of the Therapeutics Committee. However, they may be called upon to act as resource persons when needed. The Therapeutics committee shall serve as the technical evaluation committee for drug related matters. The PBAC shall therefore work closely with the therapeutics committees and shall make drug procurements based strictly on the selection/recommendations of the therapeutics committee.

9.4. Organization and Reporting:

All heads of agencies shall report the composition of their committees every two (2) years and submit a semi-annual accomplishment report to the Policy Planning and Advocacy Division (PPAD), BFAD every 20th day January and December.

10. NDP Compliance Officer.

10.2 Qualification: The NDP compliance officer shall be a Food and Drug Regulation Officer (FDRO).

Definition of Terms:

1. Therapeutics Committee. It is a multidisciplinary committee with the main objective of promoting and ensuring the safe and effective use of good quality drugs and is the approving authority on drugs and related matters.

2. Technical expert. One who has the clinical experience and clinical expertise in the use of drugs in her/his ﬁeld of specialty or a clinical pharmacist who has experience and background in therapeutics.

3. Compliance Officer. One who is tasked with gathering, analyzing and reporting data on the agency's compliance with the Generics Act and other matters related to its implementation. 

All other provisions under Administrative Order No. 51 which are not covered by these amendments shall still remain in effect.

This order shall be effective immediately.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
