Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Tel. No. 7l1—9502/711—9503

   
<date>04/16/2001</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 9 s. 2001</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Policy Guidelines for the First 100 Days and Beyond of the GMA Administration</subject>

<body>


I. BACKGROUND

On January 23, 2001, Her Excellency President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo issued the “GMA Policy Framework: First 100 Days and Beyond” outlining the basic policies, strategic thrust, key themes and ethical standards of her administration. The GMA administration deﬁned its policies around three major areas that interrelate closely with one another. These are:

1. People: People empowerment through people participation

2. Market: Focus on the need for efﬁcient markets and'systems facilitated by clear and consistent rules and by leveling playing ﬁeld for various interests and business groups

3. Institution: Development of credible institutions through a result-oriented bureaucracy with public servants of high ethical and moral standards

The policy framework regarded people as strategic resource and the civil society as a partner in strengthening democracy. The GMA administration maintained the focus on addressing poverty and resolving armed conﬂict to attain genuine and lasting peace and social order within the nation. As such, the call emphasized that the programs and projects should occur within the ﬁrst 100 days but need not be completed only within the ﬁrst 100 days of the administration.

Congruent to the GMA Policy Framework, the Health Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA) adopted by the Department of Health in 1999 sets the direction for the health sector. HSRA ultimately aims to improve the health status of all Filipinos through greater and more effective coverage of national and local public health programs, increased access to health serifices especially by the poor and reduced ﬁnancial burden on individual families. The HSRA serves as the primary vehicle that will bring the country toward the achievement of the National Objectives for Health.

Through the HSRA, the DOH pfoposes to implement changes in five(5) interrelated areas: a) Hospital Reforms; b) Local Health Systems Development; c) Public Health Program Reforms; d) Health Regulations Reforms, and; e) Health Care Financing Reforms. Programs, in particular, the Sentrong Sigla Program and the Health Passport Program, have been designed to fast-track the implementation of these reform initiatives especially at the local level.

In order to ensure that the Department of Health responds adequately and effectively to the call of the GMA administration and for it to sustain reform initiatives, these policy guidelines outline parameters that shall be adOpted and major objectives that shall be pursued.

II. Policy Guidelines

1. Internalization of the following Core Values among the DOH public servants:

I — Integrity and Honesty
E — Excellence and Professionalism
C — Compassionate Service

2. Adoption of a paradigm to be able to advocate and make people appreciate the interrelatedness of the HSRA reform areas.

8 - Simplify This is to ensure that programs and plans are understood by those who will execute it
E - Execute. There is no need to start new programs but to implement what has been established and continue those that gave positive results
E - Evaluate. It is important that we have established baselines and measurable suCcess indicators of our programs

3. Pursuit of three major objectives from Which key strategies and measurements will emanate. These are:

a. Making available and affordable, appropriate and quality medicines for the Filipino people.
b. Assure the provision of high quality best practice interventions in public health towards reducing infant and maternal mortality and reduction of the main causes of mortality and morbidity in the country
c. Assure the provision of appropriate, affordable and high quality personal health services to the Filipino people

4. Completion or initiation of yarious programs and projects within the GMA policy framework, as follows:

4.1 People Empowerment

This includes, but is not limited to, programs and projects that encgurage or involve people participation such as:
a. Empowerment of families for better decision-making in health including responsible parenthood and family health care ﬁnancing.
b. Responsible stewardship of the environment such as multi—sector collaboration and awards for environmental health protection projects including solid waste management projects.
c. Advocacy campaigns for multi—sectoral involvement in health promotion and disease prevention and control, to include services such as rabies prevention and control projects, women’s health advocacy and services, promotion and healthy. lifestyle, vaccination campaigns, national TB control. program and other public health or hospital-oriented programs.
d. Organization of people’s movements among barangay health workers, health volunteers and health personnel within the DOH, the local government units and the private sector.
e. Development of health human resources to promote better performance especially among DOH and LGU staff, including resolution of issues and concerns brought about by re-engineering.

4.2 Efficient Health Systems

This includes, but is not limited to, programs and- projects that promote and institutionalize more efﬁcient systems to deliver key DOH services especially those related to:

a. health research and policy formulation and dissemination
b. formulation and dissemination of guidelines that integrate public health and hospital oriented services to ensure the attainment of the national objectives for health
c. health regulation and standards development
d. disease surveillance and referral systems
e. response to disasters and emergencies
f. drug distribution and monitoring including DOH Botikas and parallel importation
g. health human resource development especially for areas with no doctors, nurses or midwives
h. health care ﬁnancing including social health insurance

4.3. Credible Leadership

This includes, but 1s not limited to, programs and projects that renew and reafﬁrm the credibility of the health department to lead in health issues and concerns especially those related to:

a. Quality improvement programs such as Sentrong Sigla and staff performance improvement projects.
b. Collaboration with other G05 and NGOs
c. Establishment of Centers of Excellence either in public health or hospital services
d. Timely, appropriate and wide distribution of health advisories on relevant and urgent public health issues such as infectious diseases and outbreaks.

5. Prioritization of programs and projects that are epidemiologically sound and sustainable. Resource and labor intensive activities that conﬂict with the policies on disease prevention and control or health promotion and protection or these that do not promote the attainment of the national health obj ectiv’es are not encouraged.

The following are examples of program and prejects that are encouraged:
a. Continuation or completion of the measles elimination campaign and other disease reduction initiatives
b. Timely, comprehensive and responsible health advisories on emerging and re-emerging diseases such as mad cow disease, dengue and other outbreaks
c. Deployment of health human resources to ﬂar—ﬂung communities
d. Expansion of beneﬁt packages and increasing enrolment to social health insurance, as well as advocacy for better understanding of PhilHealth packages and the health passport initiatives
e. Awarenessn'aising for women and couples on women’s health needs, mother and child health and reproductive health and family health services including natural family planning
f. Project on solid waste management and cleaning and preserving the environment especially in collaboration with other government or non-government sectors.
g. Establishment of functional DOH Botika open to the public in the DOH retained hospitals and other hospitals willing to open such Botikas
h. Continuation or completion of Kidney-Lung— Heart Centers in Mindanao and other areas where these services. are needed by the people
i. Programs and projects that promote better performance and morale among DOH and LGU staff
j. Programs and projects that improve the efﬁciency and enhance transparency
of the DOH
k. Effective implementation of DOTS strategy to eliminate TB as a public health problem
l. Modernization of BFAD systems and facilities for more effective regulation of the pharmaceutical industry

III. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect 1mmed1ately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT ,MD,MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>