Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Cpd., Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz,
Manila


<date>01/24/2001</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 177 s. 2001</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT : Amendment to Administrative Order No. 117 s. 2000 Relative to the Guidelines on the Accreditation of Suppliers of Medical Eguipment, Parts Accessories and Medical Equipment Repair Shop.</subject>


<body>

Administrative Order No. 117 s. 2000 dated September 12, 2000 specifying Guidelines on the Accreditation of Suppliers of Medical Equipment, Parts, Accessories and Medical Equipment Repair Shop is hereby amended as follows:

Provision No. 2.5 (Categorization of Suppliers) is DELETED from A0. 117 s. 2000

Provision No. 3.1 (a) on Track Record

“3.1 (a) At least 20% of the customers/clients of the new applicants (suppliers) over the past two (2) years belong to the private sector (both local and foreign). However, the list of local clients shall be given priority over the list of foreign clients.

Addition to Provision No. 3.3 on Equipment Service Capability

“3.3 (d) Suppliers whose accreditation certificate has been released by this Committee are automatically considered accredited services providers covering only products exclusively distributed by the same. However, if the supplier possess the technical capability and the resources to act as a service provider for other brands not exclusively distributed by the same, they (suppliers) are required to apply for a separate accreditation certiﬁcate."

Provision 4. 6. on Accreditation Process

"4.6 Upon approval of the application and payment to the Department of
Health or the accreditation fee of one thousand pesos (P 1,000 00) per brand per category per year, a Certiﬁcate of Accreditation shall be issued. The certificate shall identify the Speclflc classiﬁcation of the supplier category, particular brand and product/equipment carried and date of expiration of the exclusive distributorship agreement. This certiﬁcate shall be issued by the Committee for Accreditation of Medical Equipment Suppliers and Medical Equipment Repair Shop and shall be approved by the Secretary of Health."

Provision on Sanctions shall be completely amended as follows

“6.1 Any failure on the part of the accredited supplier to replace within the required period the product/equipment which failed the acceptance testing of the Department of Health and as reported to the Accreditation Committee on Medical Equipment shall be a ground for blacklisting of the Supplier for one year effective upon receipt of the Blacklisting Order of the Secretary of Health.

“6.2 Any failure on the part of the supplier to deliver the subject equipment identical to the equipment submitted for evaluation and as reported to the Accreditation Committee on Medical Eguipment shall be a ground for blacklisting for one (1) year if it involves minimal defect, and permanent blacklisting, if it involves substantial defect.

“6. 3 Submission of‘falsified documents shall be a ground for permanent blacklisting without prejudice to the proper criminal case that may be ﬁled against the Supplier.

“6.4 The Accredited Supplier shall remain in good standing for the entire duration of the accreditation period otherwise the supplier shall be automatically delisted with proper notice indicating the reasons therefore.

Forms number 2 and 3 are hereby modiﬁed as attached.

All other provisiOns of Administrative Order No.117 s. 2000 remain in full force and effect

This Order shall take effect immediately following its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.


</body>
<sign>ANTONIO S. LOPEZ, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Undersecretary of Health
Ofﬁcer-in-Charge</signtitle>

<body>
ACME Form No. 2
Revised January 2001

Department at Health
COMMITTEE ON MEDICAL EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS ACCREDITATION

REQUIREMENISFOR ACCREDITATION

l. DOCUMENTS FOR SUBMISSION

Upon application, the applicant for accreditation shall submit one certified true copy of each of the following documents.

A. Legal and Documentary Requirements

1. For Single Proprietorship:
a. Mayor’s permit and pertinent licenses* to include Ofﬁcial Receipt*
b. Registration Certiﬁcate of Business name from the Department of Trade and Industries*

2. For Corporation or Partnership
a. Mayor’s Permit and pertinent licenses* to include Ofﬁce Receipt*
b. Authenticated photocopy of the Certiﬁcate of Registration with Securities and Exchange Commission* Article of Incorporation* and By—Laws

3. Social Security System (SSS) Clearance*

4. Value Added Tax (VAT) Registration Certiﬁcate*

5. Authority for the Department Accreditation Committee or its representatives to verify documents submitted and to conduct ocular inspection without prior notiﬁcation of the company.

B. Financial Capability

6. Income Tax Return for the last (2) years duly received by the BIR*

7. Audited Financial Statement for the last two (2) years duly receives by the BIR*

C Service Capability

8. List of product line or items being carried for sale

9. Original brochure-s of all products/equipment being carried

10. A Certiﬁed True Copy (CTC) of detail exclusive dealership/distributorship agreement supplier With manufacturer listing at detail the responsibility of bath the supplier and manufacturer (please see attached format Form 4). The agreement should be notarized and authenticated by the consular office in the principals place of business.

11. Certiﬁcate of availability of spare parts

12 Resume of full time technical personnel qualiﬁed to proud: installation and maintenance services fer the speciﬁc product sold (please read 3 .3 a) melting centﬁcates at training (Local/Foreign) issued by the principal/manufacturer.

D. Physical Plant/Office

13. Location map of office and storage (to guide the Inspection team)

14. Floor plan. Including dimensions of efﬁce and sterage in relation to adjacent areas.

15. One recent photo of each of the following areas:

a. working
b. ofﬁce
c. storage

E. Track Record

Please see attached format, Form No 5

F. Man Power Requirement

16. Three (3) full time personnel for single proprietorship

17. Five (5) full time-personnel for corporationor partnership

I. MINIMUM NETWORTH REQUIRMENTS

A Networth of P1,000,000.00 (1 Million) per category at the time of application.

NOTE: For renewal of application, attach a copy and present the original of the prevroas year's Certiﬁcate of Supphers Accreditation for Medical Equipment.

* to present original documents for veriﬁcation

ACME Form No. 3.
Revised January 2001

Department of Health
COMMITTEE ON MEDICAL EQUIPMENT SUPPLIERS ACCREDITATION

REQUIREMENT FOR ACCREDITATION OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT REPAIR SHOPS/MAINTENANCE SERVICE PROVIDERS

1. DOCUMENTS FOR SUBIMIISSION

Upon application, the applicant for accreditation shall submit one certiﬁed true copy of each of the following documents.

A. Legal and Documentary Requirements

1. For Single Proprietorship:
a. Mayor's permit and pertinent licenses* to include Ofﬁcial Receipt*
b. Registration Certiﬁcate of Business name Ifrom the Department of Trade and Industries*

2. For Corporation or Partnership
a. Mayor’ s Permit and pertinent licenses* to include Office Receipt*
b. Certiﬁcate of Registration with Securities and Exchange Commission*, Article cf Incorporation* and By-Laws .

3. Social Security System (SSS) Clearance*

4. Authority for the DOB Accreditation Committee or its representatives to verify documents submitted and to conduct ocular inspection without prior notification of the company.

B. Financial Capability

5. Income Tax Return for the last (2) years duly received by the BIR*

6. Audited Financial Statement for the last two (2) years duly received by the BIR*

C. Service Capability

7. List of equipment that the company can repair/maintain

8. List of test and calibration tools/equipment

9. List of technical personnel (please see paragraph 3. 3)

10. Resume with work specialization of each technical staff member including certiﬁcates of training (Local/Foreign) issued by the principal manufacturer

11. Remittance list of Social Security System premiums (current SSS R3 and R5 froms stamped received by SSS)

D. Physical Plant/Ofﬁce

12. Location map of ofﬁce and storage (to guide the inspection team)

13 Floor plan, including dmtenszons of ofﬁce anti storage in relation to adjacent areas

14 One recent photo of each of the following areas:

a. working
b. ofﬁce
c. storage

E. Track Record

15. List of major customers served for the last two years (2). Include name and address of each customer, equipment repaired/maintained name and tel No. of contact person.

MINIMUM NETWORTH REQUIRMENTS:

A Networth of P500,000.00 (ﬁve hundred thousand) at the time of application.

NOTE. For renewal of application, attach a copy and present the original of the previous year's Certiﬁcate of Suppliers AcCreditation for Medical Equipment.

* to present original documents for veriﬁcation

</body>