Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZA AVENUE, STA. CRUZ,
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-9502, 711-9503
FAX NO. 743-1829


<date>01/09/2001</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 172 s. 2001</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: POLICIES AND GUIDELINES ON THE PRIVATE PRACTICE OF MEDICAL AND PARAMEDICAL PROFESSIONALS IN GOVERNMENT HEALTH FACILITIES.</subject>


<body>

I. Rationale

The Department of Health encourages the employment of physicians and paramedics personnel who are experts in their ﬁeld of practice in various government hospitals and other government health facilities. It is envisioned to attract the. best and the, brightest professionals for medical and paramedical positions, in order to 1) provide adequate quality medical care to patients especially the indigent; 2) teach, train and interact with the other medical and paramedical professionals and; 3) Conduct relevant studies and research thereby enhancing the quality of medical and health care delivery systems.

As an incentive and in recognition for their commitment to remain as Members of the hospital staff for a longer period for continuous improvement of the health care delivery service of the facility, private practice is allowed.

The following are the expected beneﬁts in allowing private practice of government medical and paramedical personnel in government hospitals and other health facilities:

1. The income generated from the use of hospital facilities by private patients will augment the hospital budget and promote self-sufﬁciency towards ﬁscal autonomy.

2. The presence of Medical Specialist within the hospital during ofﬁce hours, who otherwise would be in their other private clinics, ensures supervision and guidance of patient care at the time they are needed most.

3. The inputs from other government health professionals would Further enrich and enhance the healthcare delivery system.

4. Allowing private practice would serve to encourage non-hospital based health professionals to update their knowledge and skills to conform with the present standards of medical care.

5. Resident trainees can gain much from assisting consultants in the management of the consultants' private patients. They can learn “state of the art” medical evaluation and management, which they would not otherwise experience.’

However, administrative and ethical; issues on medical and other paramedical practitioners in government facilities engaging in private practice became a major concern. There is need to balance the need for these professionals and the expected beneﬁts.

A set of policies and guidelines is hereby formulated to determine the coverage; limitation and responsibility of all concerned in the delivery of quality health care services.

II. Deﬁnition of Terms:

a) Private practice - refers to clinical practice of which the health services rendered are remunerated.

b) Government Physician - a Doctor of Medicine, PRC registered and employed in government owned hospitals or public health facilities.

c) Fellows / Diplomates are medical professionals who were certiﬁed by the relevant specialty society after complying with all the requirements set by the said society.

d) DOH Certiﬁed Medical Specialists are medical professionals who were certified by the Department of Health until 1989 after meeting the requirements set by the Department.

e) Medical Specialist — a Doctor of Medicine; PRC registered with a certiﬁcate as Fellow and/or Diplomate of a relevant specialty society or a doctor who has passed the Department of Health Medical Specialist Examination, given an appointment by the Secretary or his authorized ofﬁcial.

f) Visiting Consultant — a Doctor of Medicine; PRC registered with a certificate as Fellow and / or Diplomate of a relevant specialty society or a doctor who passed the Department of Health Medical Specialist examination, who has an approved appointment by the Secretary or his authorized ofﬁcial as a one peso/year Consultant in a DOH hospital or other government health facility and renders teaching, training as well as consultancy services.

g) Honorary Consultant — a Doctor of Medicine, PRC registered with a certiﬁcate as Fellow and / or Diplomate of the relevant specialty society or a doctor who passed the Department of Health Medical Specialist examination, and who has retired from his / her regular duties but with an approved appointment by the Secretary or his authorized ofﬁcial as a one peso/year consultant in a DOH hospital or other health facility, who renders teaching, training and consultancy services.

h) House Physician — a Doctor of Medicine, PRC registered, with no specialty training but with competence to render medical care.

i) Dentist - a Doctor in Dentistry; and PRC registered.

j) Government paramedical professionals - allied professional health providers, duly registered with the PRC, such as Nurses, Midwives, Therapist, Medical Technologists, Social Workers, Pharmacists and other technicians.

III. Scope:

This shall cover the private practice of all government salaried physicians and other paramedical and allied professionals in government health facilities (DOH hospitals, LGU hospitals and other health facilities, central, regional or local).

IV General Guidelines:

A Qualiﬁed Medical / Paramedical Practitioner:

1. Medical Specialists who are holders of plantilla or of medical pool items for at least one year In corporate hospitals, the corporate board will determine qualified medical specialist.
2. Visiting and Honorary Consultants
3 House Physicians
4. Dentists who are holders of plantilla items for at least one year.
5 Other paramedical and allied professionals who are holders of plantilla items for at least one year

B. Requirements for Application for Private practice

1. Medical, dental and paramedical professionals with plantilla items

a. PHIC accreditation;
b. Performance Evaluation from the mother unit of at least Very Satisfactory rating for the past 12 months;
c. Certiﬁcate of no pending Administrative Case;
d. Additional requirements to be set by the hospital management to safe guard the provisions of quality health service in the institution.

2. Visiting or Honorary consultants or dentists with no hospital plantilla item.

a. PHIC accreditation
b. Medical Credentials Committee Recommendation and approval by the Chief of Hospital/Medical Center Chief;
c. Documents or certiﬁcation of participation in the hospital’s training activities for the past years duly signed by the Department Chairman concerned and the Chief of Medical Professional Staff (for renewal only);

C. Procedure for Certiﬁcation or Issuance of Permit for Private Practice:

1. Interested medical and paramedical professionals will apply in his /her choice of government hospital or facility.
2. The Medical Facilities’ Credentials Committee will evaluate applicants'based on the requirements to determine if qualiﬁed to avail of this privilege and will recommend to their Hospital Ethics Committee.
3. The Hospital Ethics Committee will review and recommend the qualiﬁed medical professionals to the Chief of Hospital.
4. The Chief of Hospital shall recommend the qualiﬁed physician/dentist to the Regional Director in case of medical facilities located in the regions outside of the NCR, for favorable endorsement;
5. The Regional Directors shall endorse the list of qualiﬁed physicians, dentists and other paramedical professionals through the Zone Undersecretaries to the Secretary of Health.
6. The Secretary of Health or his authorized representative approves the permit for private practice.

D. Hospital Policies and Procedures related to Professional Fees

1. Only pay patients with or without Medicare privileges shall be charged professional fees according to standardized schedule of fees of all procedures, surgical interventions, examinations and etc.
2. Billing and Collection of professional fees should be done through the Hospital Billing and Collection Units.
3. The current National Health Insurance (NHI or Medicare)rates shall be used as the basis for fees/charges for those in the Medicare Wards (Service Medicare). There should be a ceiling for additional charges based on prevailing rates as speciﬁed within the area or by the respective Specialty board.
4. Payment of hospital bills shall take precedence over professional fees.
5. Charging of deposits and down payments for professional fees are strictly prohibited.
6. Admission, transfer, discharge and other related disposition of patients shall follow existing DOH hospital policies and procedures;
7. Billing procedures shall be in accordance with the existing DOH hospital policies and procedures and COA rules and regulations.

V. Special Provisions:

a) Training residents are not allowed private practice during their training period.

b) Full time Medical Specialists are allowed to admit private patients in their hospitals during ofﬁce hours but are allowed private practice in private hospitals only after ofﬁce hours.

c) In the event that provisions of this Administrative Order would not be applicable, the Hospital Management through the appropriate ofﬁces, will present recommendations to the Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau, who in turn, would evaluate the merits of each case and would make the necessary recommendations to the Secretary of Health.

d) In instances where the medical professional who is interested to avail of this privilege is connected to any ofﬁce responsible for licensing and regulation, and its private practice would have an apparent or undeniable conﬂict between his private interests and public duties and might in any way inﬂuence him in the discharge of his duties, it is the prerogative of the Secretary to deny the request on the grounds of conﬂict of interest.

e) It is the prerogative of the Hospital Directors to institute the necessary internal controls to safe guard the institutions as long as they are not inconsistent with this Administrative Order.

VI. Effectivity:

This Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

Existing issuance/s related to the subject and all other Orders inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby rescinded.

ALBERTO G. R ALDEZ, JR., MD
Secretary of Health /- 50-0/

</body>
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>