Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila
Tel. No. 711-9502/711-9503
   
<date>03/19/2001</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 7-B, s. 2001</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF INDIGENCY FUND AT JOSE R. REYES MEMORIAL MEDICAL CENTER</subject>

<body>
 

A. INTRODUCTION

Fund amounting to one million pesos (Php 1,000,000.00) was allocated to Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center to support the medical needs of indigent patients. The fund was intended to subsidize drugs and medicines, medical supplies, surgical operations and other special procedures performed for indigent patients referred by the Secretary of Health.

This Order is hereby prescribed to institutionalize a more effective system for managing and utilizing the Indigency Fund and install a regular fund replenishment process.

B. GENERAL GUIDELINES

I. Eligible Beneﬁciaries

The folloWing are eligible for support from the Indigency Funds:

(a) Indigents and/or under-privileged persons duly certiﬁed by DSWD (Social Case Study);
(b) Direct dependents of such indigent persons; and
(c) Indigents endorsed by Secretary of Health

2. Beneﬁts Coverage

Hospital-related expenditures that qualify for support will include those for drugs and medicines, laboratory tests and procedures, X-rsy, andother diagnostic procedures including ultrasound and other services, therapeutic procedures and other services deemed to be necessary for or needed by the patient as recommended by the attending physicians, surgical costs, and hospital room and board.

3. Fund Utilization Requirements

(a) Approval

Request for medical assistance ﬁom Indigency Funds shall be forwarded to the Secretary of Health for approval with the following docurtrents:

i. Summary of expenses charged per patient (Patient's Account)
ii. Copies of the patients’ Brief Case History as prepared by the attending physician (Clinical Abstract)
iii. Certiﬁcations of Indigency Status
iv. Other Supporting Documents as needed

The Secretary of Health may delegate this authority to duly desigrated senior ofﬁcers of the Department of Health. List and specimen signatures of duly authorized signatories in the absence of the Secretary of Health shall be forwarded to Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center.

(b) Reporting Requirements

The Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center shall submit a copy of Monthly Liquidation Reports (MLR) to the Public Assistance Unit - Oﬁce of the Secretary (PAU-OSEC) copy ﬁrmished Finance Service within one (1) week after the end of month.

4. Fund Allocation

The Public Assistance Unit of the Oﬂice of the Secretary will conduct a qumterly analysis of Indigency Fund utilization. Allocation and distribution of Indigency Fund to Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center will be based on Fund Utilization Report

C. SPECIFIC PROCEDURES

The implementing mechanism will consist of a chain of activities that shall be initiated both at Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical and at the Public Assistance Unit of the Ofﬁce of the Secretary of Health.

The following ofﬁce/person shall be involved in the process:

I. DOH Central Office:

1. Oﬁce of the Secretary
2. Public Assistance Unit
3. Finance Service

II. Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical

1. Ofﬁce of the Chief of the Medical Center
2. Attending physician
3. Social Worker(s),
4. Accounting and Control Units.

III. The Speciﬁc procedures of the implementing mechanism are as follows:

1. The indigent clients seeking assistance to avail of this fund for medical assistance shall approach the Public Assistance Unit at the Oﬁice of the Secretary;

2. Walk-in clients seeking for medical assistance regardless of endorsement shall be screened by the Public Assistance Unit and will be reconunended for approval to the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative.

3. Requests for financial assistance shall be approved only by the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative;

4. Approved request for ﬁnancial assistance ﬁom the Indigency Fund transferred to Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center shall be the discretion of the Secretary of Healﬂr. Disbursements from the ﬁrnd shall be subjected to the existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

5. The attending physician shall prepare the brief Merit case history, clinical abstract and prescribed course of neatrnent;

6. The hospital accomting/ﬁnance service shall prepare the Qumterly utilization / liquidation reports reﬂecting the charges made for the period. against the indigency ﬁrnd, attested by the Chief of the Medical Center and veriﬁed by the Commission on Audit (COA) Resident Auditor;

7. The Public Assistance Unit shall conduct a quarterly monitoring and evaluation, annual fund utilimtion review and other administrative concerns relative to the Indigency Funds.

D. REPEALING CLAUSE

Provisions of existing administrative issuances, guidelines or regulations inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, superceeded or modiﬁed as required;

E. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, M.D, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>