Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
1003 Manila, Philippines
Trunk Line 743-83-01
Direct Line 711-95-02 to 03
Fax Line 743—18-29, e-mail: osec@doh.gov.ph


<date>02/15/2001</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 182 s. 2001</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Adoption and Implementation of Code Alert System for DOH Hospitals During Emergencies and Disasters</subject>


<body>

I. RATIONALE:

Most emergencies and disasters are unpredictable but are not totally unexpected. Some events, which trigger disasters, such as typhoons and volcanic eruptions, or threats of civil disorders, may be expected several hours before they occur. Others, such as earthquakes, may occur without warning. A stance of readiness to respond is assumed whenever potential emergencies are foreseen. Emergency management and control measures are usually indicated for those types of emergencies. Preventing measures, preparedness program are likewise helpful in mitigating or preventing the effects of such emergencies and disasters. Hospitals play a very vital role in emergencies and disasters. All hospitals must get ready to respond whenever disasters are foreseen and/or declared. The organization of the medical care is unquestionably the focal point for coordinating the health sector’s response to this host of complex needs, since response and prompt care is critically important for saving lives.

With this concern an organization shift and a code alert system is hereby introduced as a mechanism in the hospital set-up for the provision of medical services during emergencies and disasters. This order is adopted to describe the expected levels of preparation and the most suitable responses by all concerned especially during mass casualty situations

DEFINITION OF TERMS:

2.1 Medical Emergency — any oc-currence which requires an immediate medical response.

2.2 Disaster - a serious disruption of the functioning of society, causing widespread human, materials or environmental losses which exceed the ability of the affected people to cope using it’s own resources.

2.3 Hospital Emergency/Disaster — occurs in a hospital when the resources for dealing with the situation are inadequate for immediate action. In such circumstances normal procedures should be abandoned and resources increased so as to. expand hospital capacity.

2.4 In-Hospital Response Team — provides immediate emergency medical assistance to victims brought to the hospital for proper medical care.

2.5 On- Scene Response Team - is a small group of specially qualiﬁed physicians and other hospital personnel who shall rush to the scene of the disaster as soon as ordered to provide quick and immediate medical assistance to victims.

2.6 Hospital Code Alert Systems - is an agreed system among hospitals as a tool to alert the hospital to respond during emergencies and disasters (internal or external) in terms of an organizational shift in management and mobilizing it’s resources (manpower, equipment, supplies etc.)

2.7 Red Tag - serious patients, in life threatening situations who needs immediate attention such as patients with obstruction or damage to airway, disturbance of breathing, disturbance in circulation and those needing life saving measures and urgent hospital admission. Hospital Emergency Incident Command System (HEICS) - is an example of an emergency management system which employs a logical management structure, deﬁned responsibilities, clear reporting channels, and a common nomenclature to help unify hospitals with other emergency responders.

III. APPLICABILITY COVERAGE:

3.1 These regulations and procedures shall apply to all Department of Health hospitals particularly to general tertiary hospitals or end referral hospitals for trauma victims. All other hospitals may adopt these general principles and may adjust their alert levels based on their capability.

IV. GENERAL GUIDELINES ON THE DISASTER CODES:

4.1 During emergencies and disasters, the hospital shall appropriately organize to respond to the condition. It shall institute a Hospital Emergency Incident Command System (HEICS). HEICS is designed to provide an appropriate and effective organization in emergencies and disasters that should result in the survival and recuperation of as many patients as possible. It is ﬂexible and made up of positions each of which has a speciﬁc mission to address an emergency situation. Moreover it allows ﬂexibility in the sense that only those positions or functions which are needed are activated. It is important that regardless of type of emergencies the four basic components which are Operation, Logistic, Planning and Finance must be retained at all cost.

4.2 All hospitals shall :

a. Have an existing emergenCy preparedness plan duly institutionalized, reviewed and updated regularly and properly disseminated to all members of the hospital staff.
b. Adopt the HEICS during emergencies and disasters.

4.3 The DOH hospitals shall provide technical assistance to local government hospitals and other institutions that will get involve in the medical response during emergencies and disasters.

4.4 The DOH personnel mobilized during these situations shall be entitled to overtime pay and other allowable benefits due them. This shall be supported through the issuance of a pertinent hospital order and which shall state funding of such overtime from savings of the hospital, HEMS - STOP DEATH funds of the hospital or any other funds subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

4.5 Strict compliance and enforcement, monitoring, evaluation and formulation of new policies and guidelines pertaining to medical emergencies and disasters shall be the responsibility of the Department of Health. through the Health Emergency Management Staff (HEMS).

V. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES:

A. DISASTER CODE WHITE

1. Conditions for Adopting Code White

a. a strong possibility of a military operation, e.g. a coup attempt;
b. any planned mass action or demonstration within the area;
c. forecast typhoons, the path of which way affects the area;
d. national or local elections or plebiscites;
e. national holidays or celebrations like Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve, Labor Day, Independence Day, All Saint’s Day, Holy Week etc. . .. and
f. other conditions which may be declared as disasters

2. Requirements for Responding to the System

a. Manpower
a.1 General Surgeons
a.2 Orthopedic Surgeons
a.3 Anesthesiologists
a.4 Internists
a.5 O.R. Nurses
a.6 Ophthalmologists
a.7 Otdorhinolaryngologists
a.8 2nd response team should be on call .
a.9 emergency service personnel, nursing personnel and administrative personnel residing at the hospital dormitory shall be placed on call status for immediate mobilization.

b. Medicines and Supplies
b.1 ensure that emergency medicines ( especially for trauma needs) should be stocked up and be made available at the emergency room
b.2 medicines and supplies in the operating rooms should likewise be reviewed and increased to meet sudden requirements
b.3 other needs such as x-ray plates, laboratory requirements, etc. should be made available and not required to be purchased by victims.

c. Others
c.1 The hospital’s Operation Center should be activated and continuously report and coordinate with the Regional and
DOH Central Operation Center
c.2 personnel department to prepare for mobilization of additional staff
c.3 ﬁnance department to ensure availability of funds in cases of emergency purchases and the like
c.4 logistics department to coordinate with possible suppliers for additional requirements
c.5 dietary department to open to meet the needs of the victims as well as the health personnel on duty.
c.6 security force to institute measures and stricter rules in the hospital.

3. Procedures for Implementing the Code White:

a. The hospital Code White Alert shall be declared by the Secretary of Health or by the:
a.1 Director - Health Emergency Management Staff
a.2 Medical Center Chiefs/Chiefs of Hospital
a.3 HEMS - STOP DEATH Hospital Coordinator
a.4 Head of the Disaster Committee of the Hospital

b. The alert level is raised, lowered or suspended by the Secretary of Health or by:

b.1 the respective Medical Center Chiefs/Chiefs of Hospital
b.2 or their designates

c. Conditions to raise or suspend the alert level:

c.1 oncethe threat is increased or is no longer present
c.2 arrival of patients in the hospitals to warrant the raising of the alert level; likewise alert level can be suspended when no signiﬁcant incident is monitored and the hazard or condition (typhoon, election, bombing etc..) is already ﬁnished and/or contained

B. DISASTER CODE BLUE

1. Condition for Adopting Code Blue

a. is proclaimed when 20-50 casualties (red tags) are expected or
suddenly brought to the hospital .

2. Requirements for Responding to the System

a. Manpower

a.1 On-Scene Response Team
a.2 Medical Ofﬁcer in charge of the Emergency Room
a.3 All residents of the Department of Orthopedics
a.4 Medical Ofﬁcer in charge of the Operating Room
a.5 Surgical Team on duty for the day
a.6 Surgical Team on duty the previous day
a.7 Mental Health Professionals
a.8 All Anesthesiology residents
a.9 Toxicologist, chemical experts for poisoning and/or chemical cases ( if available)
a.9 All third and fourth year residents
a.10 Administrative Ofﬁcer or designate
a.11 Nursing supervisor on duty
a.12 All OR nurses
a.13 Social Workers
a.14 Dietary personnel
a.15 Ofﬁcer in charge of supplies at the CSR
a.16 The entire security force and
a.18 Institutional wOrkers on duty

b. Medicines, supplies etc.

b.1 all those mentioned in code white plus
b.2 other needs of victims other than medicines and supplies depending on the disaster should as much as possible be made available

c. Others

c.1 all those mentioned in code white plus
c.2 the Chief of Hospital/Medical Center Chief or his designate should make proper coordination with other hospitals for networking and/or possible transfer of patients.
c.3 management should assign a liaison ofﬁcer and/or public information ofﬁcer to coordinate with otheragencies and serves as the spokesperson of the hospital.
c.4. social service section should prepare assistance to victims in coordination with the mental health professionals of the hospital if available and the Department of Social Welfare; in addition they should lead in providing information to relatives of victims
c.5. mortuary section should anticipate dead victims brought to the hospital for proper care and identiﬁcation
c.6 the security force in anticipation for possible inﬂux of patients, relatives, responders, police, press etc... should provide for proper procedures to enable smOoth ﬂow of trafﬁc inside the compound especially for the ambulances.

3. Procedures for Implementing the Code Blue

a. All provisions is the same as that mentioned in Code White.

DISASTER CODE RED

1. Condition for Adopting Code Red

a. is proclaimed when more than 50 (red tag) casualties are momentarily anticipated or expected "or suddenly brought to the hospital

2. Requirements for Responding to the system

a. Manpower

a.1 All persons enumerated under Code Blue
a.2 All medical interns and clinical clerks.
a.3 All nurses
a.4 All nursing attendants
a.5 All institutional workers
a.6 All administrative staff

b. Medicines, supplies etc

b.1 all those mentioned in Code Blue plus
b.2 provision of networking with other hospitals in the event that a certain requirement is not available in the hospital

c. Others

c.1 all those mentioned 1n Code Blue plus
c.2 the Chief of Hospital/Medical Center chiefs can Cancel all types of leaves and can order all personnel to report to the hospital.
c.3 the Chiefs of Hospital/Medical Center Chiefs can temporarily stop all elective admissions and surgeries and network with other hospitals.
c.4 the Chiefs of Hospital/Medical Center Chiefs should anticipate and request additional manpower and specialists net available in his hospital. He is further authorized to accept medical volunteers and other professionals to augment it’s manpower resources rather than transferring patients

3. Procedures for Implementing Code Red:

a. all provisions is the same as that mentioned in Code White

VI IMPLEMENTING MECHANISM: FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF RESPECTIVE DOH UNITS

These regulations shall be administered by the following:

3.1 The HEMS - STOP DEATH Coordinators of the hospitals shall directly oversee the implementation of these guidelines in their respective hospitals; he Shall report to the Chief of Hospital/Medical Center Chief and the Director of the Health Emergency Management Staff.

3.2 The Medical Center Chiefs/Chiefs of Hospitals shall administer these regulations and submit reports to the Center for Health Development Director copy furnish the Director, HEMS.

3.3 The Center for Health Development Directors shall be responsible for the implementation and adoption of this guideline and provide updates, feedback and policy recommendations to their respective Undersecretaries.

3.4 The Undersecretaries shall provide. feedback and policy recommendations to the Secretary of Health.

3.5 The enforcement and compliance, monitoring and evaluation, consolidation and analysis and subsequent recommendation for policy formulation and amendments shall be the responsibility of the Health Emergency Management Staff.

VII EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

This Administrative Order shall take effect upon signing.


</body>
<sign>ANTONIO S. LOPEZ, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Officer-in-Charge
Secretary of Health</signtitle>