Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel. No. 743-83-01


<date>01/16/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2002-0073</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementation Guidelines for the Unified GTZ Support to the Philippine Health Sector</subject>


<body>

I Rationale:

The health projects supported by the German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) have undergone a major reorganization with the support of the Department of Health, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC or PhiIHeaIth) and the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA). The main objective of the reorganization is the streamlining of the German involvement in the sector for improved performances in supporting the Health Sector Reform Agenda. The consolidated GTZ support includes five components: (i) Social Health Insurance; (ii) Pharmaceuticals; (iii) Family and Reproductive “Health; (iv) Local Health Systems Development; (v) Hospital Equipment Maintenance. From the German side, an advisor under the supervision of a program manager heads each of these components

In reference to the proceedings of the bilateral negotiations between the Philippine and German Governments held in Manila on 12 September 2001, representatives of both the Philippine and German governments signified the need to streamline German assistance for purposes of efficiency and in support of the Philippine Health Sector Reform Agenda and its subsequent reorganization. The negotiations approved the implementation of the first phase of a Unified GTZ support (2002-2004).

This new arrangement will ensure strong linkage to the Department of Health (DOH) and the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) through their respective technical and field units.

II OBJECTIVES

1. To improve effectiveness of the German support to the current and evolving needs of the DOH and PHIC especially in improving access to quality health care services by the poor section ofthe population;

2. To improve efficiency of the German support by increasing the synergy between the existing interventions supported by GTZ. And;

3. To contribute to the efforts of the Philippine Department of Health - to unify and coordinate external assistance.

III DEFINITION OF TERMS

a. Unified GTZ support — All GTZ technical assistance to the Philippine Health Sector

b. GTZ Health Team — all members of the team hired by the GTZ support funds and under the supervision of the Program manager

c. Program Manager — the GTZ hired expert appointed to manage the Unified GTZ support.

d. Steering Committee — the body created to provide directions to the GTZ support, chaired by the Undersecretary for External Affairs.

e. Component - a package of measures and activities that are clustered to produce speciﬁc results that contribute to the achievement of the over-all purpose of the GTZ support

f. Advisor — the GTZ support counterpart personnel who is responsible for each component hired by GTZ.

9. Phase — time period for which the Federal Republic of Germany commits support — usually three years

IV IMPLEMENTING ARRANGEMENTS

1. Reorganize the Existing GTZ—assisted Projects into Components.

Guided by the proposed operationalization guidelines sent by the Secretary of Health to the Secretary of the National Economic Development Authority, the GTZ team internally reorganized and identified the personnel complement and appointed the program manager and the advisers to the different components. The result of the reorganization was communicated officially to the Chairman of the Steering Committee. The chairman conﬁrmed the appointment of the new team and officially announced the new members of the GTZ Health Team.

2. Organize the Steering Committee

2.1. The members of the steering committee are herein named:

Chairperson: Undersecretary for External Affairs
Vice Chairperson: Director of the Bureau of Local Health Development
Members: Director of the Bureau of International Health Cooperation
Director of Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau
Chief of the Unified Project Management Division
Officer-in—charge, Foreign Assistance Coordinating Office, PHIC
Manager, Corporate Planning Department, PHIC
SVP, Operations, PHIC
Director of the Center for Health Development for Eastern Visayas
Chief of the Local Health Assistance Division of CHD Eastern Visayas
Assistant Vice-President, PhiIl-lealth Regional Office 8
IPG of Region 8, PHIC
IPP of Region 8, PHIC
Representative of Project Monitoring Staff of NEDA
GTZ Program Manager
Each Advisor for each component
GTZ Director of the Philippine Office
Representative of selected province LGU involved in the implementation

2.2. Functions of the Steering Committee:

- Provides strategic directions for the implementation of the Unified GTZ Support in line with GOP priorities

- Analyzes the performances of the Unified GTZ support and suggest appropriate actions based on the result of the analysis

- Amends components or adds new components to the GTZ Support in line with policies of the GOP and the German Government

- Approves the annual strategic work plan prepared by the managers of the GTZ support, including the level of technical and financial support to the different components of the German support

- Ensures that field experiences of the GTZ support are analyzed and utilized for further development of policies, strategies and implementing guidelines

2.3. Frequency of Meetings.

The Steering committee meets at least once a year. However, if there are issues/concerns arising in the implementation of the activities of the GTZ support, an emergency meeting may be called for by the Chairperson.

2.4. Secretariate to the Steering Committee

The secretariate to the steering committee shall be chaired by a personnel of the BIHC and vice chaired by the GTZ program manager.

3. Planning Procedure

3.1. The Steering Committee convenes a planning group composed of the GTZ Health Team and representatives from DOH-BIHC, PHIC FACO and BLHD to prepare a strategic work plan to be submitted to the steering committee members not later than the first week of October each year.

3.2. The steering committee meets during the third week of October to provide direction for the program and to approve the strategic plan.

3.3. The program manager convenes all advisers and point persons to develop an operational plan based on a draft plan prepared by the Local Health Systems development component only for jointly implemented activities. This planning should be done not later than first week of November.

3.4. During the last week of November or the first week of December, each component advisor shall convene its counterparts and partners to develop their operational plan taking into account the directions of the steering committee and the annual strategic plan and the common operation plan.

4. Managerial Responsibilities of DOH BIHC

The BIHC shall designate personnel for each component who will facilitate the day—to-day implementation of the different components of the German support.

5. Technical Responsibilities of DOH BLHD, DOH Facilities and Standards and DOH CFH

The different technical units which programs and services are being supported by the different components of the German support shall provide policy and subject matter guidance to the different components. The respective offices are also encouraged to imbibe the technical contents, the systems, procedures and tools that the components are developing and implementing with the perspective of owning the succeeding lessons to wit:

- PHIC Foreign Assistance Coordinating Office for the social health insurance component Bureau of Local Health Development for the Pharmaceutical component

- Center for Family and Environmental Health for the Family and Reproductive Health Bureau of Local Health Development and PhilHealth’s FACO for the Local Health Systems component

- Center for Facilities Standards and Regulations for the Hospital Equipment Maintenance Component

It is for the advantage of the DOH and PHIC that the units andlor offices concerned shall ensure that the respective component of the German support are included in their major programs and activities so as to optimize the German support and contribution.

6. Managerial and Technical Responsibilities of PHIC FA CO

The Foreign Assistance Coordinating Office is the interface of the social health insurance component to the Corporation. The FACO coordinates with the PHIC’s entities and the component for planning and implementation of the activities. Relevant staff to the planning and to the implementation of activities is assigned to work with the component. Regular meetings between the FACOs’ OIC and the component Advisor are part of the implementation. The FACO provides the necessary assistance to coordinate the social health insurance component activities with other institutions at the national and regional levels (DOH, NEDA, LGUs).

Furthermore, FACO ensures that adequate policy environment be concurrent to the implementation of pertinent activities that will contribute to the progress of the Corporation in heading towards universal coverage, especially through innovative operational research.

FACO shall undertake the day-to—day implementation of the social health insurance component and closely coordinate with the program and the technical staff in the course of implementation.

7. Convergence in Southern Leyte

All components will interact in Region 8 (Southern Leyte) in support to the HSRA convergence zone. All activities of the German support implemented in Region 8 will be part of the LHSD component plan.

8. Role of Center for Health Development (CHD) region 8

The Center for Health Development shall oversee the implementation of the planned activities of the German support within the region. These roles include:

- Representing in the Steering committee
- Participate in all planning sessions
- Act as Implementation partner ofthe different components in the region
- Contribute technical and financial support and assistance to the components
- Participate in baseline studies and monitoring activities

9. Role of PHIC Regional Office (PRO) 8

The PHIC Regional Office takes part in planning the activities and takes a leading role in implementing them, in agreement with PHIC Head Office guidelines. Together with the social health insurance component, it analyses and outlines the operational needs for implementation, and contributes technically and financially to the development of the needed tools for implementation as well as to the implementation itself.

PRO will provide technical assistance and do ceerdinative functions with offices (DOH,CHD) on matters which will directly affect the project.

10. Link to LGUs

The main partner of the DOH, PHIC and their respective units in all aspects of implementation are the provincial LGU and the municipai LGUs of the identified areals of implementation. Their role mainly dwell into:

- Participate in the planning activities
- Pass Iegislations to provide assistance to implementation (technical and financial)
- Designate key personnel to be involved in the implementation
- Lobby with national agencies to develop national policies that are necessary to allow innovaﬂons
- Institutionalize good practices that are being implemented

V FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS

During the bilateral negotiations, the German government committed support for the first three years. The Philippine counterpart shall be raised by the DOH and PHIC based on the budget that the respective units allocate from its budget line.

VI.MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Baseline study shall be implemented during the first year of the implementation of the German support in the province. Indicators shall be developed that will serve as the basis for a periodic monitoring by the Unified GTZ support with the guidance of DOH and PHIC.

VII. EFFECTIVITY

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, M.D., MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>