Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-95-02


<date>09/30/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 155 s. 2002</docnum>

<subject>Subject: GUIDELINES GOVERNING ACCREDITATION OF TRAINING CENTERS / INSTITUTION AND TRAINER CONDUCTING TRAINING PROGRAM OR REVIEW / SEMINAR COURSES FOR EMBALMERS IN THE PHILIPPINES.</subject>


<body>

I. RATIONALE

The Department of Health, Committee of Examiners for Undertakers and Embalmers shall exerciSe accreditation and regulatory function under these guidelines. These rules for accreditation are issued to implement the provision of (PD. 856) pursuant to Section XI of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Chapter XXI — Disposal of Dead Persons” which was approved on 30 September 1996, these guidelines are formulated for the implementation and strict compliance by all concerned. The needs to regulate potential trainors and training institution or centers for embalmers is rightly in time .due to increasing demand in the practice of the profession.

Currently, the need to uplift and institutionalized activities undertaken in the field of lecture and activities including actual application plays a vital role in the practice of such profession.

II. OBJECTIVE

These guidelines and criteria are promulgated in order to establish, regulate and uplift standards of training centerslinstitution including trainers conducting training program or review/ seminar courses for embalmers in the Philippines.

III. SCOPE

These guidelines and criteria shall apply to all duly licensed or registered training center or institutions and trainer/conducting training programs or review! seminar courses for embalmers.

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS

1. Embalmer - a duly licensed person who applies, injects or introduces any chemical substance, drug or herb internally or externally to a dead human body or deceased person for the purpose of burial or cremation.

2. Committee - the Department of Health Committee of Examinersfor Undertakers and Embalmers.

3. Certificate of Registration — a written certification issued by the Department of Health Registration Committee of Examiners for Undertakers and Embalmers authorizing to perform embalming procedures.

4. Training Institution — refers to a facility/establishments that render training services relative to the practice of embalming and undertaking.

5. Accreditation— an act of recognition or a method of determining that an eligible organization, institution or individual complies with approved standards.

6. Embalming — preparing, disinfecting and preserving a dead body before its finally disposed.

7. Embalming Establishment — a place where dead a body is embalmed or treated for burial.

8. Trainer — refers to a qualified individual who complies with accreditation requirements.

9. Allied Medical Professions - pertain to other professions other than Doctor of Medicine, but limited to the following: Nurses, Midwives, Physical Therapist, Med. Technologists, OT, Rad Tech, BS Public Health.

10.Category I Funeral Establishment — facilities offering funeral services with available chapels and embalming facilities.

11. Undertaker - a duly licensed person who practices undertaking.

V. ACCREDITATION REQUIREMENTS (Training Centers/Institution)

a. There shall be submission of pertinent documents relative to application for accreditation of their training centers/institution to Committee of Examiners for Undertakers and Embalmers for screening and evaluation

b. There shall be submission of floor plan lay out including locationlvicinity map of training center ! institution signed by the owner.

c. There Shall be provision of training program or training coorse that includes.

c.1. session plan with short description of each topic
c.2. methpdologies to be used for each topic emphasis on actual procedures
c.3. time allotment per topic
c.4. expected oIItput for each activity

VI. STANDARD FACILITY REQUIREMENTS

A. There shall be an adequate space provision with minimum of 12 square meters allotted to the floor area to accommodate a maximum of 12 trainees.

B. There shall be sufﬁcient ventilation and lighting for the use of the facility.

C. The facility should be affiliated with Category I funeral establishments for the purpose of actual demonstration.

D. There shall be sufficient equipment and instrument to facilitate lectures and demonstration

D.1. Standard size Embalming table
D.2. Hydro Aspirator
D.3. Nasal tube Aspirator
D.4. Trocar Set
D.5. Curved Threaded Arterial Tube Set
D.6. Scissors Set
D.7. Forceps Set
D.8. V-Tubes Set
D.9. Half Curved Needles Set
D.10. Chairs with side arm set
D.11. Blackboard/ Chalk/ Eraser
D.12. Cabinet
D.13. Typewriter/ PC set
D.14. Personal Protective EqUipment Set (PPE)
D.15. Chemical Supplies (for-Embalming Procedures).

E. There shall be provision of continuous supply of potable water for the facility. 

F. There shall be provision of toilets and lavatories for male and female;

Note: Reference shall be made to the number of fixtures corresponding with ratio stipulated in exi sting IRR of PD 856.

G. Vermin abatement control program shall be provided for the facility

H. Training Center/ Institution shall practice corresponding waste management program.

I. The Training Center shall be complemented with staff that corresponds to day to day activity.

I.1. Administrator
I.2 Lecturer/Trainor
I.3. Clerk

VII. ACCREDITATION FEE

A.

There shall be a non-refundable accreditation fee in the
amount of P. 1, 000.00 payable to Department of Health your
filing of application for accreditation of the facility.

A non refundable fee of One thousand Five Hundred Pesos

(P 1, 500) shall be paid upon approval of the application for

accreditation of the facility.

U-lu-u

Vlll. INSPECTION AND MONITORING

A. All new applications for accreditation of training center / institutions shall be subject to ocular and facility inspection. No accreditation shall be issued unless initial inspection has been conducted by the Committee of Examiners for Undertakers and Embalmers or its duly representative.

B. Annual inspection Shall be implemented by CEUE for accredited training center/institution.

C. There shall be records thatshall be made available to determine compliancew! accreditation requirements.

IX. TERMS & CONDITIONS OF CERTIFICATE OF ACCREDITATION FOR TRAINING FACILITY/INSTITUTION

A. There shall be separate accreditation fee for- each branches of training centers or institution

B. The certificate of accreditation is non-transferable

C. Accreditation Shall be automatically cancelled upon change in location of the facility or training institution/center. A re-accreditation has to be applied and approved by the Committee of Examiners for Undertakers and Embalmers

D. The certiﬁcate of accreditation of the training center/institution shall be placed in a. conspicuous place readily seen by the public for the purpose of information and guidance

E. The certificate of accreditation for the training center/institution shall automatically expire every 31 of December of the current year.

F. There shall be Sufficient number of passers in the examination by CEUE or equivalent to 30% of enrollees in the training center/institution to facilitate renewal of accreditation.

X. TRAINCR ACCREDITATION PAYMENTS

A. There shall be submission of pertinent documents relative to application for accreditation of trainor to the Committee of Examiners for Undertakers and Embalmers.

B. Screening Process Shall be conducted by the Committee upon presentation of the following documents by the candidate.

8.1. Certificate of Recent Physical and Medical Examination conducted by a government physician.
8.2. Certified True Copy of Transcript of Records of Diploma
8.3. Current Professional Tax Receipt.
8.4. Copy of relevant Training attended
8.5. NBI Clearance

XI. QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS

A. Individual applying for accreditation as trainor shall have the following qualifications:

A.1. Duly licensed Embalmer
A.2. Has earned at least 80 units' In college
A.3 A minimum of 5 years actual embalming practice from the Date of first registration.

XII. ACCREDITATION FEE

A. There shall be a nonerefundable fee in the amount of P500.00 payable to the Department of Health upon filing of application for accreditation of trainor.

B. A non-refundable fee of P 750.00 shall be paid upon approval of application for trainor accreditation.

C. All payments shall be made to the Department of Health.

XIII. QUALITY ASSURANCE

A. The applicant for accreditation as trainor should passed the proficiency test administered by the DOH Committee of Examiners for Undertakersand Embalmers.
B. The proficiency test given by the Committee shall consist of oral and practical examination
C. The applicant for accreditation as trainor shall. file the corresponding requirements under oath or notarized.

XIV. VIOLATION AND PENALTY

Any violation of these Administrative Order governing accreditation of Training Institution or Center and Trainer for Embalmers and/or P.D.856 and its implementing laws shall be a ground for denial or revocation of issued accreditation.

XV. INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES OR COMPLAINTS.

The Committee or its duly authorized representativels shall investigate the complaint or charges and verify whether the training centers/institution, trainer is liable thereof. If proven liable, the corresponding penalty shall be imposed.

XVI. EFFECTIVITY

These accreditation guidelines shall take effect upon approval and publication in a newspaper of general circulation.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>