Republic ofthe Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue. Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. 743-8301 locals 1125, 1132, Fax (632) 743-1829, 743-1786; Direct 711-9502, 711-9503
osec@doh.gov.ph


<date>03/25/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 92 s. 2002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing the Implementation of Administrative Order No. 32 of the Ofﬁce of the President dated March 18, 2002, in the Department of Health.</subject>


<body>

Pursuant to Section 3 of Administrative Order No. 32 of the Ofﬁce of the President dated March 18, 2002, the following rules and regulations are hereby issued to govern its implementation in the Department of Health:

1. As provided for in Section 2 of OP Adm. Order 32, the 4—day a week, 10—hour work schedule does not apply to government hospitals and health centers and those assigned in the emergency services.

2. All other health personnel, including those assigned in the support services of hospitals, shall be divided into two (2) groups-

(a) One group shall report for work four (4) consecutive days from Monday to Thursday each workweek, except on holidays; and

(b) Another group shall report for work four (4) consecutive days from Tuesday to Friday each workweek, except on holidays.

3. The option not to report for work on either Monday or Friday shall take into consideration the nature of the work assignment of employees concerned. To provide continuous services in all areas of operations, those performing identical or closely related functions shoUld be divided such as services are available from Monday to Friday each week.

4. The employees in either group shall render not less than ten (10) hours a day, either from 7:00 o’clock in the morning to 6:00 o’clock in the afternoon, or 8:00 o’clock in the morning to 7:00 o’clock in the evening, exclusive of meal periods.

5. The enjoyment of the Gliding Flexible Work Schedule under Administrative Order No. 27, s. 1997, issued on November 6, 1997, shall be between 7:00 - 8:00 AM and 6:00 — 7:00 PM provided that the work hours should not be less than 10 hours for the months of April and May 2002.

6. All employees in both groups shall report on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays to assure the efficient delivery of basic governmental services to the public.

7. For monitoring purposes and for the information and guidance of the transacting public, schedule of employees rendering service from Monday to Thursday and from Tuesday to Friday shall be posted in conspicuous locations in their offices, copy furnished the Personnel Services Division/Section/Unit.

These rules and regulations shall take effect April 1, 2002 and shall govern the implementation of Adm. Order No. 32 of the Office of the President issued on March 18, 2002 in the Department of Health.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

<body>

MALACAÑANG
MANILA

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES

ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 32

PROVIDING FOR ADJUSTED OFFICIAL WORKING HOURS IN ALL DEPARTMENTS, BUREAUS, OFFICES AND OTHER AGENCIES UNDER THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF THE GOVERNMENT, INCLUDING GOVERNMENT-OWNED OR CONTROLLED CORPORATIONS, DURING THE MONTHS OF APRIL AND MAY OF THE YEAR 2002

WHEREAS, it is the policy of the State to encourage and promote domestic tourism;

WHEREAS, tourism has been identified as one of the largest contributors to the country’s gross domestic product and a major contributor to the growth and development of the national economy;

WHEREAS, knowledge and awareness on the part of our citizens of our country’s various natural, historical and cultural heritage can make a significant contribution to the nation’s goals of national unity and socio-economic, cultural and educational development;

WHEREAS, as front liners in the public service, government employees could best encourage the promotion of domestic tourism by imparting their own experiences to the public;

WHEREAS, to enable government employees to visit the various domestic tourism destinations in the country and for them to convey the knowledge and experience they have gained during their travels, the Secretary of the Department of Tourism recommends the adjustment of their official working hours during specific regular working days of the week in the summertime.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby order:

SECTION 1. During the months of April and May of the year 2002, employees of all departments, bureaus, offices and other agencies under the executive branch of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, shall have the option not to report for work on Mondays or on Fridays provided that during said period:

(a) such employees shall report for work four (4) consecutive days of each workweek, except on holidays;

(b) such employees shall render not less than ten (10) hours of work a day, exclusive of meal periods, either from Tuesday to Friday or from Monday to Thursday of each workweek, except on holidays; and

(c) the head of the concerned department, bureau, office, agency or government-owned or controlled corporation shall ensure that at least half of its workforce shall report for work on Mondays and the other half on Fridays to assure the efficient delivery of basic governmental services to the public. The concerned department, bureau, office, agency or government-owned or controlled corporation must have a full or complete workforce on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.

SECTION 2. This Administrative Order shall not cover the Armed Forces of the Philippines, the Philippine National Police, the Philippine Coast Guard, government hospitals and health centers and other government agencies involved in providing health, safety, police, security, protection and other emergency services.

SECTION 3. All concerned departments, bureaus, offices, agencies and government-owned or controlled corporations are directed to promulgate the appropriate rules and regulations for the efficient implementation of this Administrative Order.

SECTION 4. The Department of Budget and Management is hereby directed to issue the necessary guidelines, rules and regulations to provide for adjustments in the wages or compensation, including PERA, ADCOM and payment for overtime services, of government employees affected by the implementation of this Administrative Order.

SECTION 5. The legislative and judicial branches of the government, the constitutional commissions and the private sector are encouraged to adopt the above mentioned official working hours during the months of April and May of the year 2002.

SECTION 6. This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

City of Manila, March 18, 2002.

</body>

<sign>GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO</sign>
<signtitle>President of the Philippines</signtitle>

By the President:

<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMULO</sign>
<signtitle>Executive Secretary</signtitle>