Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80


<date>05/02/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 109-A s. 2002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Management of the Construction Phase of Infrastructure Projects for Hospitals and other Health Facilities</subject>


<body>

I. Rationale

One of the reform strategies under the Health Sector Reform Agenda for the hospital system is the physical development and revitalization of hospitals and other health facilities. This strategy demands the smooth and unobstructed implementation of infrastructure projects.

Construction activities involve eno1mous influx of materials and labor. These greatly affect delivery of hospital ca1e as well as overall operations of the hospital. Hence, construction/[aetivities should be properly guided and controlled to guarantee, most importantlyﬁthe protection of users visit01s, existing buildings and equipment during the period of construction.

The National Building Code of the Philippines Fire Code of the Philippines, the Implementing Rules and Regulation of Presidential c1ee No. 1594 as amended in July 2000 stipulating the procedures for the implementation of government infrastructure projects and other related 1u1es and regulations Serve as bases for the issuance of these guidelines.

II. Objective

This Order shall prescribe guidelines for the management of infrastructure projects with the end-goal of ensuring the oldeiliness of construction activities and the safety and cleanliness of institutional areas especially hospital facilities during construction phase.

III. Coverage

These rules and procedures shall cover all existing, ongoing and future infrastructure projects of the DOH nationwide.

IV. Definition of Terms

A. Building Permit — A document which should be obtained first by any person, firm or corporation including any agency or instrumentalityof the government, intending to erect, construct, alter, repair, move, convert or demolish any building or structure or cause the same to be done, from the office of the Building Official assigned in the place where the subject building is located or the building work is to be done.

B. Occupancy Permit - A certificate issued by the Building Official within thirty (30) days if, after final inspection and submission of Certificate of Completion of the Project by the Full Time Project Supervisor, it is found that the building or structure complies with the National Building Code and the Fire Code of the Philippines.

C. Project Site — Includes the construction area, area for temporary facilities prescribed herein and access to the construction area.

D. Construction Site — Covers the actual area of construction work including parts of existing buildings or structures if the work is repair/ renovation.

E. Variation Order - May either be in the form of a Change Order, Extra Work Order or a supplemental agreement, issued to cover any increase/ decrease in work ,quantity, including the introduction of new work items that are not included in the original contract, and reclassification of work items that are due to change of plansor specifications.

V. General Guidelines and Specific Procedures

A. Permits

1. Any infrastructure project without a Building Permit from the Office of the Building Official shall not be allowed to be started.

2. The Building Permit number shall be displayed at all times at the Project Site, adjacent to the project billboard.

3. The project billboard indicating project title, location, name of contractor, contract amount, implementing agency / unit, architect/s, engineer / s, project duration, etc. shall also be displayed.

4. An infrastructure project shall be required to secure an Occupancy Permit from the Office of the Building Official, and clearance from the Bureau of Fire Protection after final completion and prior to acceptance and turnover.

B. Temporary Facilities

1. The temporary facilities of contractors-shall be limited to a warehouse for construction materials, a field office with toilet and meeting room and laborer's lounging/ eating area (open pavilion style with toilets). The same temporarily facilities should be located within the project site and enclosed with temper ary fencing. - '

2. The mateiials and specifications for temporary fencing include.

a. Corrugated GUI Roofing Sheets (3a., 26 with a minimum height of 1800 millimeters 01 six (6) feet
b. Cocolumber or formlumber for frame/bracing at the interior side
c. Pre—painted or painted finish

3. No temporary housing for the contractor’s staff and laborers will be constructed within the project site and the rest of the institutional premise. Hence, all existing temporary housing for contractors staff and laborers shall be demolished as soon as possible.

C. Security And Safety

1. The centractors staff and laborers are not allowed to conduct any of the following activities within the construction site:
a. Cooking of food and eating
b. Smoking and drinking of alcoholic beverages during, between and after working hours
c. Washing and drying of clothes
d. Sleeping or, napping.
e. Loitering especially outside the construction site and project site.
f. Urinating (Portable toilets shall be placed at the most practical locations within theconstruction site).

2. Contractors staff and workers shall be in uniform with ID’s hung around their necks at all times.

3. Hard hats shall be worn at all times by staff, laborers and visitors at designated areas.

4. A ’sari-sari store’ may be provided by the contractor but they should be erected within the project site, away from public view and should sell only to contractor’s staff and laborers.

5. A temporary fencing around the project site should be retained for suspended projects and preperly maintained during the period of suspension.

6. An entry for contractor’s staff and laborers and for construction equipment and materials shall be provided separated from the institution’s main entrance.

D. Good Housekeeping Practices

The following practices should be strictly observed by the Contractor on a daily basis :

1. Clearing of construction site and project site of garbage, at least thirty (30) minutes prior to end of a work shift.

2. Collection of debris and excess materials and hauling at designated areas.

E. Variation Orders

1. As a general rule, Variation Orders shall not be allowed during the construction period.

2. Any changes from the original plan may be done after the original contract period or after the defects liability period has lapsed.

3. Any changes in materials will be permitted only if the alternative is stronger or more durable than the originally specified material and that funds for any additional cost for the purpose is available and certified by the institution’s
budget officer.

F. Monitoring / Evaluation Through Contractor’s Performance Evaluation System

1. As soon as possible and by virtue of separate Orders, the DOH Central Office, Centersfor Health Development and the Hospitals shall each create a Contractor’s Performance Evaluation System ~ Implementing Unit (CPES-IU) which will be responsible for adopting the guidelines set by the NEDA Infracom for contractors performance.

2. The CPES-IU shall evaluate a contractor’s performance at least twice during the construction period. First, when the accomplishment is almost 50% and immediately upon completion or when the contractor has claimed 100% completion of the project. Their reports shall be sent promptly to the Secretary of Health, copy furnished the National Center for Health Facility Development, for appropriate action and submission to the Construction Industry Authority of the Philippines, Department of Trade and Industry.

3. The CPES-IU of each of the said DOH units shall be composed of following:

a. Unit supervisor - He/ she shall act as the head of the unit

b. Technical Personnel — They shall assist the head in the performance of the unit’s technical functions. ‘(They could come from the institution’s infrastructure or engineering, administrative, and nursing services units and from departmental representatives).

c. Clerk - He/she shall perform all of the unit’s. administrative and coordinative activities.

4. The CPES-IU shall be under the direct technical supervision of the Director III, NCHFD.

This Order takes effect inunediately.

 
</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 