Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>01/30/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2002-0075</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: IMPLEMENTING PLAN FOR DOH ANTI-GRAFT PROJECT FOR FUND UTILIZATION AND PROCUREMENT.</subject>


<body>

To improve efficiency and effectiveness in the fund utilization and procurement of goods, services and the infrastructure of DOH facilities and to assure a graft and corruption-free bureaucracy, the following policies are hereby formulated:

A. FUND UTILIZATION

1. The Work and Financial Plan (WFP) shall be posted in designated place;

2. All expenditures shall be made in accordance with the Work and Financial Plan of the concerned offices;

3. All financial transactions should strictly follow the prescribed accounting and auditing rules and regulations. Deviations from the usual prescription should be avoided;

4. All officials and employees handling financial transactions I responsibilities shall observe careful diligence in their assigned task;

5. The Central Office, Centers for Health Development (CHD’s), selected Bureaus and Hospitals shall have a functioning Finance Planning and Monitoring Committee pursuant to Department Memorandum No. 183 s. 2000 dated October 5, 2000;

6. Regular monitoring of expenditures shall be strictly observed;

7. Submission of reports to the Department of Budget and Management as a requirement for succeeding releases shall be immediately complied with and monitored;

8. Reports on employee’s malpractices shalt be looked into by the management and shall be reported to appropriate authorities for immediate disciplinary action.

B. PROCUREMENT

1. Generally procurement shall be thru public bidding unless a more appropriate method has been duly recommended and approved by the Head of the Agency; 

2. The Annual Procurement Plan-(APP) shalt be in accordance with the Work and Financial Plan (WFP) which is prepared and submitted every last quarter of the preceding year;

3. There shall be a single Bids and Awards Committee (BAC) as provided for in EC. 40 dated October 8, 2001, each for the Central Office, Centers for Health Development (CHD’s), selected Bureaus and Hospitals;

4. The BAC shall be responsible for the conduct of public bidding up to awarding and also recommend to the Head of the Agency the other alternative mode of procurement;

5. Emergency procurement shall be resorted to only in certain instances where an emergency needs arises and only upon approval by the Head of the Agency. All rules and regulations pertinent to emergency procurement shall be strictly followed;

6. Standard lead-time schedule in the processing of transactions as provided for in the IRR of EC. 40 shall be strictly observed. Hence, no follow-up of transactions shail be allowed or entertained;

7. The Electronics Procurement System as mandated under E0. 40 shalt be strictly implemented, if when and where applicable;

8. Monitoring of all procurement transactions shall be regularly conducted;

9. Appropriate sanctions shall be imposed to officials and employees for non-compliance to government policies, rules, laws and regulations. Likewise, for erring suppliers, contractors and the likes;

10. The Financial & Planning Management Committee (FPMC) shalt be responsible that all provisions under this policy shall be properly complied with.

These including all other existing Administrative Orders, RA 6713 or otherwise known as the Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards, RA 3019, otherwise known as the Anti-Graft and Corrupt Law, and those pertaining to Anti-Graft and Corrupt Practices, shall be strictly followed.

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>