Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT


<date>05/29/2002</date>
<doctype>JOINT ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 122-A series 2002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines of Sec. 2, DOH Special Provision, CY 2002 General Appropriations Act, entitled: Phase-out—Plan</subject>


<body>

This administrative order pertains to the implementation of the devolved functions for health services, in accordance with the pertinent provisions under Sec 1711 of RA. No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, Section 2, DOH Special Provision, CY2002 General Appropriations Act which mandates DOH to implement devolution of basic health service delivery to local health facilities. In order to provide for an effective means for implementing the Phase-out plan, the following rules and regulations are hereby adopted and promulgated:

I. General Guidelines

1. The policy objectives for implementing special provision no. 2 shall be as follows:

a) to equalize the per capita expenditures for health in provinces with and without National Hospitals;
b) to upgrade the tertiary level hospital care capabilities of National Hospitals; and,
c) to lessen the primary and secondary hospital care activities in National Hospitals.

2. This order shall apply to all Government Hospitals, both national and local that are not beneﬁted by the presence of regional hospitals andfor medical centers. .The phase-out-plan shall include, ambng others, the devolution of basic service delivery functions still being performed by medical centers and regional hospitals.

3. In lieu of the savings identiﬁed by the abovecited Special provision, the DOH shall utilize the Local Health Assistance Fund line item under OSEC Fund, CY 2002 GAA as initial funds for the implementation of the Phase-out Plan. Such line item shall be increased in subsequent GAAs as additional funding source for the implementation of the Plan.

4. Subsequent funding shall emanate from the introduction of a new item in subsequent GAAS that will be preposed jointly by the DOH and DEM to be entitled, Local Goverrunent Equation Fund. Such item shall constitute a lump sum with a Special provision that the same shall only be available to subsidize provinces that have no DOH hospitals.

5. The DOH shall focus on its monitoring and technical assistance functions in the field units and, upgrade equipment capability of its tertiary and specialty lioSpital functions. In the course of implementing this plan, DOH shall operate within its budget ceiling for hospital, thus there should be no decrease in the appropriations for DOH hospital operations.

6. LGU shall initiate advocacy and awareness campaign directed to provincial and city government executives regarding the continued need to improve health care provisibn within their respective jurisdiction.

II. Implementing Guidelines

The following activities shall guide both the DOH and the LGUs in the implementation of the phase-out-plan, starting FY 2002 to 2005:

1. Identify provinces without access to DOH heapital facilities;

2. Develop criteria for allocation of Local Health Assistance;

3. Advocate and provide technical assistance to LGU for enhancement of local health facilities;

4. Formulate guidelines or memorandum of agreements for effective implementation of hospital systems;

5. Implement activity-based budgeting. The approach 1s that the DOH hospitals should be able to show how much is spent for treating primary, secondary and tertiary cases;

6. Adopt ICD- 10 in tabulating morbidity and mortality data properly categorizing patients into primary, secondary and tertiary;

7. Develop guidelines for the sub-allotment bfeqhalization funds to LGUs without the beneﬁt of DOH hospital facilities;

8. CHD offices to submit quarferly consolidated progress and utilization report to the National Center for Health Facilities Development; and,

9. Submit report to House Committee on Appropriations and the Senate Committee on Finance.

LGU

1. Prepare their respective local hospital development plan;

2. Implement and utilize the sub-alloted funds for hosPital development;

3. Conduct advocacy and awareness campaign regarding efﬁcient use of primary and secondary hospitals by its constituents;

4. Ensure continuous investment for upgrading primary and secondary facilities;

5. Support and implement available PhilHealth Incentive Package;

6. Monitor and evaluate phase-out-plan implementation; and,

7. Submit quarterly progress and utilization report to concerned CHD Director.

III. Effectivity

This order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

<sign>EMILIA T. BONCODIN</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Budget and Management</signtitle>