Republic ofthe Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE on THE SECRETARY
Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue. Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. 743-8301 locals 1125, 1132, Fax(632)743-1829, 743—1786; Direct 711—9502. 711-9503
osec@doh.gov.ph


<date>03/14/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 88 s. 2002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in the implementation of Proclamation No. 164, dated March 13, 2002, of the Office of the President, Malacañang, Manila, in the Department of Health.</subject>


<body>

Pursuant to Section 3 of Proclamation No. 164, dated March 13, 2002 of the Office of the President, Malacaﬁang, Manila, the following guidelines are hereby issued for its implementation in the Department of Health:

1. Except for employees who are assigned in rescue and emergency services and those working on a shift schedule, the Cluster Heads in the DOH Central Ofﬁce, the Heads of attached Agencies and the Directors of the Centers for Health Development (CHDs) in the different regions may not require the employees in their respective Offices to report for work on March 27, 2002.

2. Considering the nature of its services and pursuant to Section 2 (c) of Proclamation 164, hospitals are required to provide regular medical and emergency room services to the public on March 27, 2002.

3. The Chief of Hospital may not require the employees in the support service units to report for work on March 27, 2002 except those working on shift schedule.

4. Heads of Ofﬁces may, in the exercise or hisf her discretion and taking into consideration the exigencies of the service in his/ her particular area of responsibility, require employees to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on March 27, 2002, as an exception to paragraphs 1, and 3 above.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
 
<body>
MALACAÑANG
MANILA

PROCLAMATION NO. 164

DECLARING SATURDAY, MARCH 30, 2002 AS A SPECIAL (NON-WORKING) DAY THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY AND ALLOWING THE PUBLIC SECTOR, UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS, NOT TO REPORT FOR WORK ON WEDNESDAY, MARCH 27, 2002

WHEREAS, Maundy Thursday, which falls on March 28, 2002 and Good Friday, which falls on March 29, 2002 are both regular holidays;

WHEREAS, Saturday, March 30, 2002 falls between Good Friday and Easter Sunday;

WHEREAS, the Saturday falling between Good Friday and Easter Sunday has been declared a special day throughout the country in the past;

WHEREAS, the observance of Holy Week is one of our people’s most cherished traditions;

WHEREAS, our people must be given the full and uninterrupted opportunity to ponder on the significance of the Holy week and to properly observe traditions with religious fervor, without prejudice to public interest.

NOW, THEREFORE, I, GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, President of the Republic of the Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby declare:

SECTION 1. Saturday, March 30, 2002 shall be a special (non-working) day throughout the country.

SECTION 2. Furthermore, all employees of departments, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the executive branch of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, shall not be required to report for work on Wednesday, March 27, 2002 except that:

a. The head of a department, office, agency, instrumentality or government-owned or controlled corporation may be required by the exigencies of public service, direct the employees of said department, office, agency, instrumentality or government-owned or controlled corporation to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said day;

b. Employees of the Bureau of Internal Revenue, Bureau of Customs, Philippine Postal Corporation and other government departments, offices, agencies, instrumentalities or government-owned or controlled corporations that impose deadlines on the transacting public for payment of taxes, fees or fines and for compliance with reportorial and other requirements, shall be required by the head of the department, office, agency, instrumentality or government-owned or controlled corporation to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date; and

c. Employees of government departments, offices, agencies, instrumentalities or government-owned or controlled corporations providing police, security, fire protection, custodial, rescue, emergency, medical and other similar services shall be required by the head of the department, office, agency, instrumentality or government-owned or controlled corporation to observe regular working hours and provide regular services to the public on the said date.

SECTION 3. Heads of departments, offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the executive branch of the government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, are hereby directed to issue the appropriate rules and regulations to implement this Proclamation.

SECTION 4. Employers in the private sector, except the providing banking, financial, health, security and other vital services to the public, are encouraged not to require their employees to report for work on Wednesday, March 27, 2002: Provided, That such employers who opt not to require their employees to report for work are urged to make the necessary arrangements, which may include increasing work hours or allowing work on other days, to ensure that daily paid workers are paid the equivalent of the wages or compensation that they would have earned on the said date and that production schedules are met to maintain a continuous supply of goods and services. All existing labor laws shall be observed.

City of Manila, March 13, 2002.

</body>
<sign>GLORIA MACAPAGAL-ARROYO</sign>

By the President:
<sign>LBERTO G. ROMULO</sign>
<signtitle>Executive Secretary</signtitle>