Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>04/02/2003</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 34-A s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT : Guidelines to Fast-Track Procurement of Specific Essential Drugs and Medicines by the different Department of Health (DOH) Hospitals based on Actual Demand Patterns</subject>

<body>
I. RATIONALE

As mandated, the Department of Health Hospitals provide basic services and goods to the people. Among such services and goods provided, include the dispensing of essential drugs and medicines, which are pegged at prices affordable to the people.

Section 6 (d) of the Republic Act No. 6675 also known as the Generics Act of 1988 directs Drug Outlets to “inform any buyer about any and all other products having the same generic name, together with their corresponding prices so that the buyer may adequately exercise his option.” As a consequence of exercising such option, data on specific essential drugs and medicines that are popularly prescribed or chosen by the patient become evident. Such convergence in demand of specific essential drugs and medicines can be claimed, as basis for ordering the corresponding required quantities that must be carried in stock by the DOH Botikas in the retained Hospitals. Notwithstanding the mandatory use of generic names, the corresponding brand names of the essential off-patent generic drugs and medicine, which have displayed high volume demand, provide the specificity and exclusivity of the product.

Administrative Order No. 51 s. 1988 entitled “Implementing Guidelines for Department of Health Compliance with Republic Act 6675” particularly number 11.4 recognizes that “(p)rocurement made on the basis of generic specification may lead to purchase of drug products that are also identified by brand names provided that price and availability considerations make it unavoidable. In such cases, products that are also identified by brand names may be kept on stock provided that its identification and use remain exclusively on the basis of generic specification.”

Sections 48 (b) and 50 of the Republic Act No. 9184 also known as Government Procurement Reform Act authorize Agencies of the Government to undertake Alternative Modes of Procurement, particularly Direct Contracting. In accordance with the said  provisions, the rationale on the specificity and exclusivity of the highly demanded/popular off-patent generic drugs provide firm basis to traverse Direct Contracting, which simplifies the procurement process and promotes timely delivery.

This strategy of enhancing the access of the masses to public goods has been displayed and tested by the management of Jose Reyes Memorial Medical Center and is in conformity with existing auditing and accounting rules and regulations. As a result of which, fast moving and highly sought after essential drugs and medicines are bought just in time and the wastage resulting from the expiration of slow moving drugs is precluded.

II. SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS

This Order shall be applicable only for the procurement of patented, and off-patent drugs and medicines, with or without brand name, that are listed in the latest edition of the Philippine National Drug Formulary (PNDF) or as approved by the National Formulary Committee (NFC), and are highly sought after by the general public, in the different Department of Health Hospitals.

This Order shall only be applicable for DOH Botikas with Revolving Trust Fund facilities established for the specific purpose of re-selling affordable drugs to the general public.

III. OBJECTIVES

This Order is formulated in order to:

1) Provide guidelines for the different DOH Hospitals in procuring fast moving and highly sought after essential drugs and medicines;

2) Eliminate wastage attributed to none or slow moving drugs which expiry dates have lapsed;

3) Replicate good practices/strategies displayed by DOH Units, which are beneficial to the citizenry; and

4) Concretize the Government’s commitment in bringing down the cost of quality medicines.

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS

1. Generic name or Generic Terminology — is the identification of the drugs and medicines by their scientifically and internationally recognized active ingredients or by their official generic name as determined by the Bureau of Food and Drugs of the Department of Health (RA 6675).

2. Drug Establishment — is an organization or company involved in the manufacture, importation, repacking and/or distribution of drugs or medicines (RA 6675).

3. Drug Outlets —— means drugstores, pharmacies, and any other business establishments which sell drugs or medicines to the public in general (RA 6675).

4. Brand Name — is the proprietary name given by the manufacturer to distinguish its product from those of competitors (RA 6675).

5. Generic Drugs - are drugs not covered by patent protection and which are labeled solely by their international non—proprietary name or generic name (RA 6675).

6. Patented Drugs — are drugs covered with patent protection as recognized by the Philippine Government regulating body.

7. Prescription is the written order and instruction of a validly—registered physician, dentist or veterinarian for the use of specific drug product for a specific patient (AO No.62, s. 1989).

8. Generic Prescribing — is prescribing of drugs or medicines using their generic name (s) or generic terminology (AO No.62, s. 1989).

9. Dispensing — is the act by a validly registered pharmacist of filling a prescription or doctor’s order on the patient’s chart (AO No.62, s. 1989).

10. Generic DiSpensing — means dispensing the patient’s / buyer’s choice from generic equivalent, i.e., finished pharmaceutical products having the same active ingredients (s), same dosage form and same strength as the prescribed drug (AO No.62, s. 1989).

11. DOH Botikas — refer to drug outlets maintained by the DOH Hospitals that cater to the general public’s needs for essential drugs and medicines, including those who are categorized as in- and out—patient clients of the DOH Hospitals.

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES

1. The Mode of Procurement for the acquisition of essential drugs and medicines as described hereon shall be in accordance with RA 9184 and applicable existing accounting and auditing rules and regulation, subject to the approval of the Head of Agency and as delegated.

2. Revolving Trust Fund for essential drugs and medicines that shall be dispensed through the DOH Botikas must be setup by the DOH Hospitals and the specific utilization mechanisms of the same are established in order to optimize the time required for procurement and processing of payments. The establishment of Revolving Trust Funds shall be in accordance with the provisions of National Budget Circular No. 321 and Commission on Audit Circular No. 80—128 dated February 6, 1980. In the absence of such fund, explicit authorization must be secured by elevating the matter to the Secretary of Health.

3. All DOH Hospitals shall adopt the appropriate mechanism to ensure the scientific selection and quantification of highly sought after essential patented and off—patent drugs and medicines.

4. All DOH Hospitals shall monitor the prevailing price of the highly sought after essential patented and off-patent drugs and medicines as identified by their generic names and corresponding brand names, to ensure that the price of said items when dispensed have the lowest price within the immediate locality the Hospitals Operate, and such assurance shall be supported by certification from the exclusive distributors of the said goods.

5. The highly sought after essential drugs and medicines as described hereon shall be included in the DOH Hospitals’ Annual Procurement Plan (APP) or in the Supplemental APP specific for DOH Botika operations. The list of highly sought after drugs and medicines and the quarterly quantification as described in A. of the Specific Guidelines shall be the primary requirement in Direct Contracting essential drugs and medicines to be commercially dispensed by the DOH Botikas to the general public, and shall form part of the DOH Hospitals’ APPS.

6. No highly sought after essential drugs and medicines shall be procured if their corresponding resultant selling prices will be higher than those offered in the market.

7. All DOH Hospitals must expedite the procurement and payment of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines within the reasonable time.

8. All DOH Hospitals shall be authorized to undertake Check—on-Delivery mode of payment on highly sought after essential drugs and medicines provided that discounts are offered by suppliers and subject to on—the-spot inspection and quality assurance determination.

9. The stock availability of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines shall be posted conspicuously by the DOH Hospitals to guide the physicians in issuing prescriptions and to enhance informational access and transparency for the public.

10. DOH Hospitals are authorized to set mark-up price for the goods that are described hereon subject to specific restrictions embodied in the succeeding Specific guidelines.

11. All government physicians issuing prescription orders shall at all times consider the current inventory status of essential drugs and medicines stocked at DOH Botikas so as to induce greater access of the public to cheaper essential drugs with the following order of priority in Generic Prescribing: off—patent unbranded drugs and medicines, off—patent branded drugs and medicines, and patented drugs that are in the latest edition of the PNDF or as approved by the NFC for inclusion in the PNDF.

VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES

A. Determination of Highly Sought after Essential Drugs and Medicines

1. DOH Hospital Pharmacies are required to maintain records that would tally the drugs regularly prescribed by physicians and and/or preferred by patients.

2. The Chief Pharmacist of the Hospital must make a monthly report to the Chief of Hospital a list of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines as specifically identified by their generic names and brand names. The said list shall be reviewed and recommended for approval by the Hospital’s Therapeutics Committee and must be approved by the Chief of Hospital, and only then, that it shall serve as a guide for procurement. The list must contain the following minimum data elements:

a. Generic Name of the Drug, Dosage Form and Strength
b. The Corresponding Specific Brand Name of the Drug in letter a, if there is any.
c. The Total Number of Request of each of the Specific Brand Name Identified in letter b.
d. The Percentage of The Total Number of Request in letter c computed based on the Total (Cumulative Total of all brand names under the same generic name category, dosage and strength) Request for the Generically Equivalent Drug.

A copy of this report shall likewise be furnished to the Pharma 50 Project Management Unit every first Monday of the succeeding Month.

3. The projected quantity of drugs to be ordered must be determined on a quarterly basis by the DOH Hospital and proportionate to the actual demands. Proportionality shall be based on the report submitted by the Chief Pharmacist as described in the preceding provision.

4. Only drugs and medicines covered by the latest edition of the Philippine National Drug Formulary (PNDF) or as approved by the National Formulary Committee (NFC) shall be considered.

5. In the event that a highly requested essential drug and medicine, which is listed in the latest edition of the PNDF, is not available in the Hospital Pharmacy/DOH Botika, the concerned pharmacist or the issuing physician may elevate such concern to the Hospital’s Therapeutics Committee for review/evaluation and recommendation. The Hospital’s Therapeutics Committee may recommend such drug for procurement subject to the approval of the Chief of Hospital.

6. In the event that a highly requested drug and medicine is not listed in the latest edition of the PNDF, the Chief of Hospital, with the prior evaluation and recommendation of his/her Hospital’s Therapeutics Committee, may elevate/indorse such concern to the National Drug Policy Staff in order to secure clearance for procurement. The National Drug Policy Staff shall be the central unit tasked to indorse drugs for inclusion in the PNDF or tentative exemption to Executive Order No. 49 s. 1993. The Head of the National Drug Policy Staff (NDPS) in coordination with the Bureau of Food and Drugs may approve or disapprove the recommendation/justification of the Hospital. If the request is approved by NDPS, it shall be promptly referred to the NFC for approval. Once approval from the NFC is secured the concerned DOH Hospital may then proceed with the procurement of such drug or medicine.

7. Once the list of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines is established, quantified and counter-checked against the latest edition of the PNDF and the recommendation of the Hospital’s Therapeutics Committee of drugs to be procured is secured, the Chief Pharmacist shall re—format the list in the form of an APP format and explicitly identifying it for DOH Botika dispensing, the price of the drugs reflected thereon shall be subject to the price monitoring mechanism as described in the succeeding sections B and C.

B. Price Monitoring

1. The Chief Pharmacist of the Hospital or an official explicitly identified and designated by the Chief of Hospital shall be directly responsible in supervising the price monitoring of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines. Further, a Committee may be created or an Organic unit of the Hospital may be assigned by the Chief of Hospital to conduct price monitoring.

2. Price monitoring shall include the following activities but not limited to the same as may be provided by law or pertinent statues:

a) Telephone inquiries duly recorded in a logbook, stating the name of the establishment, contacted person, description of the drug and the price and date of inquiry;

b) Actual visit to drug outlets for verification of drug price duly recorded in a logbook, stating the name of the establishment, contacted person, description of the drug and the price and the date of inquiry;

c) Submission of solicited and unsolicited drug price quotations from reputable suppliers through fax, snail mail, or messenger;

d) Determination of prevailing market price (retail price) or Comparison of price for a particular off-patent essential drug and medicine from at least three (3) suppliers/drug outlets.

3. The price of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines must be cross checked from at least three (3) reputable drug outlets, preferably those which enjoy high volume of consumer traffic (example Mercury Drug, Hospital Pharmacy of a nearby DOH Hospital, etc.,).

4. Off-patent essential drugs and medicines (without brand names) also known as generic drugs shall be given priority in procurement provided that these are sourced from Drug establishments which are compliant to Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) requirement. Off- patent essential drugs and medicines (unbranded) shall be considered for procurement only when the supplier agrees to sell it at a price that would result to a DOH selling price (acquisition price including mark-ups) of at least 20% lower than the prevailing selling market price (retail price).

5. Off-patent essential drugs and medicines with brand names shall be considered for procurement, when the resultant DOH selling prices (acquisition prices including mark-ups) are at least 50% lower than the prevailing selling market price (retail price). Otherwise, generically equivalent drugs, without brand names or simply “generic drugs,” which are at least 50% lower than the prevailing selling market price (retail price) of the branded counterparts shall be considered for procurement in lieu of the branded counterparts.

6. Patented essential drugs shall be considered for procurement only when the supplier agrees to sell it at a price that would result to a DOH selling price (acquisition price including mark-ups) of at least 20% lower than the prevailing selling market price (retail price).

7. The suppliers of the highly sought after essential drugs and medicines, their contact persons/authorized representatives and their official business addresses shall be determined during price monitoring.

C. Procurement

1. Once the prevailing market price (retail price)s of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines are determined, the representative of the Chief of Pharmacy/Procurement Office or the functionally equivalent unit or Committee for Price Monitoring as directed by the Chief of Hospital, may contact the corresponding suppliers to inform the latter of Hospital’s intention to procure.

2. Negotiations at the Pharmacy level or the Procurement Office level may ensue to determine the possible price offers that suppliers will impose.

3. If the suppliers’ price offers are reasonable (Note: the Pharmacist will also determine if mark-ups would result to a price which is higher than that prevailing in the market or as provided in 3.4, 3.5, and 3.6), the same shall be reflected in the Hospital’s APP for DOH Botika as described in Specific Guidelines A.7. The APP shall then be submitted to the Hospital’s Bids and Awards Committee for review and recommendation for approval. The Chief of Hospital shall approve the APP for the DOH Botika.

4. Once the Hospital’s APP specific for the DOH Botika items is approved, the corresponding Purchase Requests (PR) shall be prepared by the Pharmacy and submitted to the Procurement Office of the DOH Hospitals.

5. Once the PRs of the highly sought after essential drugs and medicines are received by the Procurement Office of the respective DOH Hospitals, the Procurement Office shall require the suppliers to submit the corresponding price quotations for each of the highly sought after essential drugs and medicines. The submitted price quotations must be reviewed by personnel assigned in price monitoring and shall so initial/sign the recommendation for the approval of the Chief of Hospital.

6. The Procurement Office shall require the suppliers to issue a certification that they are the exclusive distributor of the specific brand of the highly sought after essential drugs and medicines and that the prices being offered are the lowest to those they offered to other outlets and such price is applicable to all DOH Hospitals within a specified time frame.

7. The Chief Pharmacist shall prepare and initial the corresponding certification that shall be signed by the Chief of Medical Professional Staff (or equivalent) and approved by the Chief of Hospital that the specific goods being procured have “no substitute of substantially the same quality that can be obtained elsewhere at more advantageous terms to the government.”

8. The Procurement Office may require suppliers of highly sought after essential drugs and medicines to further lower their price offers by giving discounts. As counter part incentive, to which, is the facilitation of the DOH Hospitals to undertake Check-on-Deliver (COD) Mode of payment. In case the suppliers accede, the discounts shall be reflected on the Purchase Order, the Disbursement Voucher and the price amount of corresponding Check adjusted accordingly. The delivery however, shall be subject to on the spot inspection, and quality assurance determination (e.g. presentation of BFAD batch certification for antibiotics, Certificate of Product Registrations, company test analysis results of the lot/batch no representative of the delivery, etc).

9. The preparation of Checks under the COD scheme shall be jointly expedited by the Procurement and the Accounting Offices of the DOH Hospitals in the optimal time as allowed by pertinent statutes or rules and regulations, to encourage suppliers to give discounts, and to preclude red tape.

10. No items shall be received which expiration dates is less than 18 months from the date of the delivery. Any items which expiration is less than that prescribed hereon shall be immediately invoiced back to the Supplier for immediate replacement.

D. Quality Assurance

1. The delivered goods shall be subject to random sampling as post market surveillance requirement. It shall be witnessed by the representative from the supplier and shall be executed by a DOH authorized inspector.

2. The Supplier shall promptly replace the sampled goods without cost to the Government.

3. The Hospital Inspection Committee shall endorse the sampled goods to the BFAD for testing.

4. No testing fees shall be levied by the BFAD on the endorsing DOH Hospitals.

5. The DOH Hospitals shall retain the amount equivalent to twenty percent (20%) of the contract price and shall release the said amount only when the sampled goods have passed the BFAD Test Analysis. Otherwise, the retention money shall be forfeited in favor of the DOH Hospitals, the goods delivered shall be recalled and the Supplier shall be subject to appropriate regulatory sanctions as provided for by law (RA 3720, as amended) and other pertinent rules and regulations. This provision shall also be applied to those covered under the Check-On—Delivery scheme.

E. Fund Management

1. The transactions shall be recorded and accounted for separately to explicitly identify the same as covered with the appropriate Revolving Trust Fund.

2. The Checks to be released under COD mode of payment shall only be released if the deliveries have passed the required on-the-spot inspection and quality assurance verification.

3. The income derived from the essential drugs and medicines shall be deposited in a trust fund set up for this purpose. The funds derived may be used for expanding the acquisition of the Hospital’s need for essential drugs and medicines, and adjunct activities such as hiring of contractual personnel, and augmentation of the maintenance and operating expense and capital outlays subject to the specific approval of the Department of Budget and Management.

F. Dispensing

1. Dispensing shall adhere to the principle of generic dispensing as provided by RA 6675 and its implementing Guidelines (section 13, AO no. 51).

2. DOH Hospitals are allowed to add mark-ups on the acquisition cost of the drugs except when such mark—ups would result to a price higher than those offered in the market and as provided in B4, B5, and B6.

3. Records of inventory and sale shall be maintained and be made available for accounting and auditing processes.

4. Bulletin Boards that will preclude asymmetric information on the availability of stocks shall be set up for public viewing and as reference to physicians in prioritizing current inventories in their prescription orders.

VII. COORDINATING INSTRUCTIONS

The Pharma 50 Project Management Unit shall be the lead unit in monitoring the implementation of this Order in coordination with the National Center for Health Facilities Development (NCFHD), and shall provide estimates, and appropriate regulatory tools and recommendations in further improving the acquisition of affordable drugs in a timely manner.

The NCHFD shall include the implementing parameters in this Order as among the indicators for DOH Hospitals’ performance. It shall likewise provide staff support and augmentation to the Pharma 50 PMU, as the need arises.

VIII. SEPERABILITY CLAUSE

If any provision in these Guidelines, or application of such provision to any circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of these Guidelines shall not be affected thereby.

IX. REPEALING CLAUSE

The provisions of previous issuances, which are inconsistent with those provided in this Order, are hereby rescinded and modified accordingly.

X. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall be effective immediately.
</body>

<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>