Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80


<date>03/17/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 29 s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: DOH Crematoria and Other Alternative Technology for Hospital Waste Treatment and Disposal</subject>


<body>

I. Rationale

In response to the public’s clamor for a proper waste disposal system particularly in Department of Health (DOH) hospitals within Metro Manila, the DOH started a Waste Management Project in 1997. The project prioritized the installation of Hospital Incinerators and Microwave Disinfection Units in DOH hospitals with the objective of reducing manipulation of medical and infectious wastes. The installation of these facilities in DOH hospitals was completed in the third quarter of 1998 and operations started soon after.

Republic Act (RA) 8749 on “The Clean Air Act” was passed into law in 1999. Speciﬁcally, section 20 of RA 8749 and its Implementing Rules and Regulations (ERR) provided for the prohibition of incineration, which is deﬁned as “the burning of municipal, bio—medical and hazardous wastes, which process emits toxic and poisonous fumes”. In accordance with the same provision, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) was mandated to “promote the use of state—of—the—art, environmentallyﬂsound and safe thermal and non-bum technology for the handling, treatment, thermal destruction, utilization and disposal of sorted, un-recycled, un-composted, bio—medical and hazardous wastes”.

This Administrative Order is being issued to prescribe guidelines on the use of crematoria and other alternative non-bum technology for the treatment and disposal of health care wastes and which are consistent with the provisions of the Clean Air Act.

II. Policy Statement

A. In preparation for the eventual phasing out of incinerators by July 17, 2003, the DOH shall transform these existing facilities into crematoria. It therefore restricts their use to the treatment of all untreated human body parts, limbs, organs and tissues that are removed during surgery, autopsy or other medical procedures. No other treatment technology shall be utilized for this type of wastes.

B. The crematoria shall serve as an add-on waste treatment technology to the existing microwave disinfection units in DOH hospitals. Hence, all concerned DOH hospitals shall maximize the use of their existing microwave disinfection units for waste treatment.

C. Assessment of all existing DOH hospital incinerators as well as microwave disinfection units by hospital engineers shall be immediately conducted to determine any need for repair/reconditioning prior to use as crematoria and/or maximal use for waste treatment.

D. The use of alternative non-bum technology for treatment prior to the disposal of health care wastes such as infectious wastes, sharps and other hazardous wastes shall be definitely encouraged.

II. Alternative Non-burn Technology of Waste Treatment and Disposal for DOH Hospitals

The following alternative non-bum technology on healthcare waste treatment for DOH hospitals are recommended based on these information: technical description of the available biomedical waste treatment system, ability of the system to achieve destruction of pathogenic organisms, investment, Operating and maintenance costs considerations, health and environmental considerations, the Clean Air Act and other regulatory requirements.

A. The Autoclave Steam Sterilization Treatment System with shredder or grinder. This is recommended for DOH hospitals and other health facilities with the condition that the ﬁnal disposal site has been pro-established.

In the meantime that the alternative technology is being set in place, DOH hospitals located in areas with private healthcare waste treatment and disposal management companies are allowed to contract out their waste treatment and disposal needs through these private companies.

B. Chemical Disinfection to destroy or kill microorganisms by the use of disinfectants. This is preferred for used syringes and needles prior to safe burial.

C. Thermal treatment using the existing hOSpital microwave disinfection units which is essentially a steam-based thermal process. The water in the wastes is rapidly heated by microwaves and the infectious components are destroyed by heat conduction. This is preferred for infectious wastes before disposing through the city/municipal collection system and for pathological wastes such as placenta and blood before disposing to a septic vault designed for the purpose.

D. Delay to Decay Process where wastes, upon proper identification and segregation are placed in a designated storage/decay room until they decay to a level that can be considered inactive, prior to disposal according to the rules and regulations of the Philippine Nuclear Research Institute (PNRI). This method must be strictly followed for radioactive and hazardous chemical wastes.

II. Implementing Mechanism

A. The DOH through the National Center for Health Facility Development (NCHFD) and the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control, Environmental and Occupational Health (NCDPC—EOH) shall be responsible for the implementation of this Order. They shall provide technical assistance, advisory services and training to personnel of Centers for Health Development (CHDs), hospitals and related health facilities.

B. In particular, NCHFD shall primarily lead in the conduct of monitoring and assessment activities in all concerned DOH hospitals. It shall also ensure that existing DOH hospital incinerators shall be assessed by their respective hospital engineers not later than June 2003 to determine any need for repair or reconditioning before securing permit to operate as crematoria from respective DENR Regional Ofﬁces.

Also, all existing DOH hospital microwave disinfection units shall be assessed by their respective hospital engineers not later than June 2003, to determine any need for repair or reconditioning before maximizing their use for waste treatment. Expenses incurred for this purposes shall be charged under the MOOE of each hospital/ health facility.

C. The CHDs shall provide technical assistance and services and conduct monitoring of DOH hospitals and other health facilities within their area of jurisdiction.

D All DOH hospitals shall ensure the effective implementation of this Order.

VI. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>