Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Tel. No. 711-9502/711—9503 


<date>03/11/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 27 s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Guidelines in the granting of Quarters/Housing Benefits/ Allowance pursuant to Republic Act (RA) No. 7305 (Magna Carta for Public Health Workers)</subject>


<body>

I. Rationale

Pursuant to RA 7305 Magna Carta of Public Health Workers Section 7.7.1 of Rule XV Compensation, Beneﬁts and Privileges of its Implementing Rules and Regulation (IRR), all public health workers who are on tour of duty and those who, because of unavoidable circumstances are forced to stay in the hospitals, sanitaria or health inﬁrmary’s premises, shall be entitled to free living quarters within the said health facilities. In support of this, the Department of Health (DOH), in its interest to provide and make accessible health services for the public especially at remate areas, shall be assigning quarters and housing within the lands cocupied by government hospitals, sanitaria or health iniirmaries for the use of public health workers.

This Order prescribes the revised policies in the provision of free living quarters/housing or allowance for public health workers in the DOH hospitals, sanitaria or health inﬁrmaries.

II. Deﬁnition

1. Health Inﬁrmary - is a health facility that provides emergency treatment and care to the sick and injured, as well as clinical care and management to mothers and and neivborn babies.

2. Hospital - is a health facility for the diagnosis, treatment and care of individuals suffering from deformity, disease, illness or injury or in need of surgical, obstetrical, medical or nursing care. It is an institution where there are installed bassinets or / beds in the management of deformities, diseases, injuries, abnormal physical and mental conditions and maternity cases.

3. Sanitarium — is a health facility for the recuperation and treatment of individuals with leprosy.

4. Tour of duty - is the period of assignment in a hospital, sanitarium or health infirmary.

III. Coverage

This Order shall cover all public health workers as defined in the Implementing Rules and Regulations (ERR) of RA 7305 who are on tour of duty and those who because of unavoidable circumstances are forced to stay within the hospital, sanitarium or health inﬁrrnary premises.

IV. General Policies

A. Health workers who are required to stay within the premises of the facility, shall be provided with the appropriate quarters in accordance with the demands of the service and not based upon the preference of the health worker.

B. Health workers who are required to stay within the premises but could not be accommodated in quarters or housing shall be granted a housing allowance which shall be discontinued upon the availability of quarters or housing

C. Health workers who prefer not to stay in the premises but whose duties require them to stay shall nevertheless be provided with quarters in the event that they shall be obliged to stay.

D. Health workers who prefer to stay within the premises but whose duties do not require them to stay in said facilities shall not be entitled to this beneﬁt.

V. Implementing Mechanism

A. The head of agency shall ascertain whether a health worker is entitled to quarters/housing beneﬁts or allowance.

B. The head of agency shall ensure that a space is made available in all health facilities. The space shall have at least access to a toilet with adequate water supply and to an electrical power source.

1. Permanent quarters shall be provided for free to the Chief of Hospital, Chief of Clinics, Hospital Administrative Officer and Chief Nurse as the nature of their functions involves round—the-clock supervision of the different activities of the hospital.

2. Temporary quarters shall be piovided for health workers who are on tour of duty or the nature of the health workers function requires that he/she should stay in the hospital premises within a limited period of time.

C. In cases where quarters or housing is not available or sufﬁcient to accommodate the health workers, the head of agency should first issue a certification stating that:

l. The nature of the health worker’s duty requlres that he or she should stay in the premises of the health facility;

2. That the quarters or housing space is not available or not sufﬁcient to accommodate the health worker.

Under these conditions, the health worker shall be granted a housing allowance at the prevailing rate in the locality until such time when adequate quarters are available or when the worker is no longer required to reside in the premises of the health facility.

D. Any agreement/contract entered into between the head of agency and the health worker relative to the granting of benefits for housing/quarters shall be in accordance with pertinent issuances and provisions of RA. 7305.

E. Funding Source

The funding somce for the housing allowance shall be included in the hospital sanitarium or health infnmary budget beginning 2003.

VI. Repealing Clause

Administrative Order 32—F s. 1994 and all other issuances inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed.

VII. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect upon date of approval.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>