Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Office of the Secretary
Manila


<date>04/02/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 34-B s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Implementation of Executive Order No. 36 issued on September 19,. 2001, Reorganizing Administrative Regions in Mindanao in Relation to the Department of Health</subject>


<body>

Executive Order No. 36 “Providing for the Reorganization of the Administrative Regions in Mindanao and for Other Purposes” was issued on September 19, 2001 with the aim of promoting efﬁciency in the government, accelerate social and economic development and improve public services. Consequently, the inclusion of the Province of Basilan and the City of Marawi in the Autonomous Region for Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) necessitate the urgent need to reorganize the administrative regions in Mindanao; Hence, the following guidelines are hereby issued to implement the smooth, effective and facilitative reorganization of the Department Of Health in Mindanao:

1. The Undersecretary of Health heading the Mindanao Health Development Office based in Davao City shall take the lead in the reorganization of Department of Health in Mindanao;

2. The Directors of affected health facilitiestogether with the key staff personnel, shall coordinate with each Other to facilitate the smooth reorganization taking into consideration the following:

a. Transfer of personnel assigned in the health facility and the; corresponding funding support and records of employees;

a.l. Incumbents to the positions shall automatically be appointed to their position to effect such transfer;
a.2. The CHDs cf originating ofﬁce shall prepare the plantilla of Personnel using the attached format to be submitted to, the receiving CHDs, Department of Budget and Management and Civil Service Commission. Subsequently the Service Records, Leave Cards, 201 File and other pertinent documents necessary to implement such transfer shall be submitted to the receiving CHDs; 

b. Transfer of Assets and Properties

The following activities shall be undertaken by the originating CHDs in the transfer of asSets and properties to the receiving CHDs:

b.1. Conduct an inventory of all assets to be transferred;
b.2. Prepare an inventory report of said. assets duly certiﬁed by the Commission On Audit (COA) which shall be categorized as follows:

b.2.1 Land,
b.2.2 Buildings;
b.2.3 Equipment and instruments (functional, non-functional, date acquired);
b.2.4 Records;
b.2.5 Drugs and medicines (expiry date, date of purchase);
b.2.6 Medical materials and supplies (expiry date, date of purchase);
b.2.7 Vehicles (running condition, not running condition, date acquired); and
b.2.8 Other tangible assets.

b.3. The Originating Office shall clear personnel from accountability for those properties to be transferred to the receiving office;

b.4. Vehicles shall be transferred from the originating CHDs to the receiving CHDs;

b.5. The Originating CHDs shall turn over to the Receiving CHDs the Inspection and Inventory Report of Transferred assets and Accounting records and documents.

c. Transfer of Funds representing Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) to support the operation of the affected health facility.

The affected CHDs shall compute the individual Personal Services (PS) of employees as well as the corresponding MOOE for transfer to the receiving CHDs;

3. Until such time that the transfer of funds in the affected health facilities and services including salaries and Other beneﬁts of personnel are provided in the GAA for the ensuing year, the originating CHDs of the transferred retained facilities shall provide the necessary funds out of its regular appropriations.

The ﬁnal report of the reorganization of the affected region pursuant to Executive Order No. 36 s. 2001 shall be submitted to the Secretary through the EXECOM for approval.

All other issuances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed/rescinded.

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>