Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila
Telephone No: 743—83-01 to 23 loc. 1125-1126

<date>09/03/2003</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 82 s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Granting of Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal to Manufacturers of Fortified Products</subject>

<body>
I. Rationale

The Fifth (5th) National Nutrition Survey of the Food and Nutrition Research Institute of the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) shows that micronutrient malnutrition, particularly deficiencies in Vitamin A, Iron and Iodine, is still a major public health problem. To address this problem, the Philippines has adapted the main strategy of fortification of commonly consumed foods to increase the micronutrient intake of the population particularly of the at-risk groups of women and children and thus, eliminate the problem of micronutrient malnutrition. In support of this strategy, two (2) major laws have been passed. Republic Act 8172 or the Asin Law which was enacted in 1995, mandates that all salt for human and animal consumption be fortified with iodine. Republic Act 8976 or the Food Fortification law of 2000, mandates the fortification of flour with Vitamin A and iron, sugar with Vitamin A, cooking oil with Vitamin A and rice with iron by November 7, 2004. Articles 7, 12, 21 and 22 of Republic Act 7394, Consumer Act of the Philippines further requires the Department of Health to establish standards of identity and quality of foods.

In support of all these laws, Administrative Order (AO) No. 4-A s. 1995 was issued by the DOH to establish guidelines for the micronutrient fortification of processed foods. As distinguished from the Sangkap Pinoy Seal, the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal (DSP) shall be awarded to all manufacturers of staples who have applied for the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal and have complied with the quality standards according to the IRR of RA 8172 and RA 8976.

Under this order, a DSP seal is to be awarded to manufacturers of staple foods. This Order prescribes the guidelines for the awarding of Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal.

II. Coverage

This order shall cover manufacturers of staples, namely rice, sugar, cooking oil, flour and salt nationwide.

III. Definition of Terms

For the purpose of these guidelines, the following definitions shall apply:

a) Fortification shall mean addition of micronutrients to staple foods such as rice, sugar, cooking oil, flour and salt based on the recommended standard set by BFAD—DOH. This also means the addition of micronutrient to processed foods at levels above the natural state.

b) Micronutrients are nutrients needed by the body in small amount but must be supplied.

c) Staples shall refer to food items that are widely and regularly consumed by the general public. These include rice, sugar, cooking oil, flour and salt.

d) Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal shall refer to the seal of good nutrition quality that will be awarded as an incentive to BFAD registered staple manufacturer who will fortify their products according to standards.

e) Food Manufacturers refers to millers, refiners, processors of food, repackers and importers

f) BFAD means Bureau of Food and Drugs

g) DOH means Department of Health

h) RDA means Recommended Dietary Allowance

i) CHD means Center for Health Development

j) LGU means Local Government Units

k) NFA means National Food Authority

l) SRA means Sugar Regulatory Administration

m) PCA means Philippine Coconut Authority

IV. Statement of Policies

a. Food Fortification staples shall be encouraged to address the micronutrients deficiency in the Filipino diet, based on the daily needs using the Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA).

b. RA 8172 or ASIN Law (1995) and RA 8976 or Food Fortification Law (2000), the major products will be fortified as follows:

1. rice with iron
2. sugar with vitamin A
3. cooking oil with vitamin A
4. flour with vitamin A and iron
5. salt with iodine

Only when the levels of fortification are met shall the product be claimed as “fortified with”.

c. The Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal shall be advocated by the BFAD, in coordination with other national agencies and local government units to staple manufacturers.

d. The BFAD, in coordination with other agencies, National Food Authority (NFA), Sugar Regulatory Administration (SRA) and Philippine Coconut Authority (PCA) shall assist in monitoring compliance of all registered staple manufacturers to RA 8976 and RA 8172.

V. Procedural Guidelines

A. Requirements

1. Duly accomplished application forms
2. A certified true copy of LTO issued by the BFAD
3. Results of product analysis of vitamin A, iron and iodine from a BFAD recognized laboratory
4. Sample of label with the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal

B. Process of Application

1. The food company applying for the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal shall submit all the documentary requirements to BFAD.

2. Applicants should pay a processing fee of P 500.00 to BFAD cashier for every application.

3. Upon receipt of the application, BFAD conducts a desk review to check completeness of the documentary requirements.

3.1 If documentary requirements are incomplete, the BFAD informs applicant thru a notice of deficiency and defers conduct of further evaluation until company submits complete requirements.

4. BFAD conducts a plant inspection to evaluate compliance with current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP) and Quality Control (QC) system for product fortification if documentary requirements are complete.

4.1 If LTO was issued earlier in compliance with these two requirements, BFAD may choose to forgo plant inspection.

4.2 It may also choose to forego the plant inspection for those receiving government assistance for the development of fortification technology, provided that a certification of assistance issued by the government concern is submitted with the application papers. For rice fortification, BFAD submits to NFA the documentary requirements for NFA evaluation.

5. BFAD conducts a plant visit (if needed), using the checklist on the fortification process as provided in Annex 1 of the IRR of RA 8976.

6. BFAD makes a final evaluation of the applicant based on the plant visit (if done) and review of documentary requirements.

C. Awarding of the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal

1. If applicant is approved, BFAD prepares the Letter of Diamond Sangkap Seal Award and Diamond Seal of Certificate of Acceptance for the signature of the Secretary of Health.

2. If application is disapproved, BFAD informs the applicant thru a letter or notice of deficiencies/notice of denial. The letter of disapproval/reconsideration contains instruction on appropriate corrective actions.

3. Manufacturers of disapproved application may apply again for the seal after instituting corrective action required.

4. Compliant food manufacturer will be provided with a Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal Certificate of Acceptance and a Letter of Award.

5. These companies shall display the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal issued by the Department of Health in the plant site.

6. The same companies shall use Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal on the approved product label.

VI. Validity/Effectivity/Revocation

The effectivity of the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal and the Letter of Award shall be from the date of issue and shall be valid for an indefinite period unless revoked for a cause as when monitoring indicates non-compliance and failure to immediately implement corrective action.

VII. Administrative Sanctions

The BFAD, in coordination with NFA, SRA and PCA, after warnings, notice and hearings, may impose any or all of the following administrative sanctions in case of violation of any of the provision of this order as provided for in RAs 8976 and 8172.

a) Order the recall of the products declared/found as mislabeled fortified staples
b) Order the correction of labeling of fortified foods staples
c) Include in the list of non-compliant food manufacturer for publication
d) Impose administrative fines provided for in RA 8976 and RA 8172
e) Suspend or cancel LTO of the manufacturing firm
f) Suspend or cancel the use of the Diamond Sangkap Pinoy Seal

VIII. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>