Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

Department of Health, 2/F Bldg. 1
San Lazaro Compound, Sta. Cruz, 1003 Manila
(632) 743-83-01 loc. 1602
(632) 711-6061


<date>01/05/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 130, s. 2004</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Abolition of Existing Procurement-related Accreditation Committees</subject>


<body>

I. RATIONALE

Accreditation, under existing administrative issuances, is deﬁned as the act of pro-qualifying suppliers to ensure that the only legitimate and qualified suppliers can participate in the bidding. It was supposed to be an essential screening and gatekeeping mechanism to ensure that only qualiﬁed bidders can transact business with the Department of Health and ultimately perform to the best interests of the government and of the Filipino people it serves.

However, accreditation has become burdensome to the Department’s personnel, who have at times been pulled out from their primary duties and ﬁmctions without additional compensation, to the detriment of their health, family, time, resources and talents. Thus, the overall intended result of accreditation from studies and research conducted has not led to any qualitative enhancement of the Department’s suppliers nor has it really resulted in the lowering of prices or the prevention of inferior, low quality items.

Furthermore, the very concept of accreditation runs counter to the governing principles of Republic Act No. 9184, otherwise known as the “Government Procurement Reform Act”, which extends equal Opportunity to all private contracting parties who are eligible and qualiﬁed to participate in public bidding.

Nevertheless, RA. No. 9184 recognizes the necessity of having a retained list of bona ﬁde suppliers in view of the Department’s possible resort to Alternative Methods of Procurement such as Limited Source Bidding, Direct Contracting, Repeat Order, Shopping, and Negotiated Procurement.

It is the policy of this Department to strictly adhere to RA. No. 9184’s governing principles of transparency, competitiveness, streamlined procurement process, system of accountability, and public monitoring of the procurement process. This Order is therefore issued to prescribe the corresponding guidelines.

II. SCOPE

This Order shall cover all accreditation committees created for the sole purpose of granting accreditation to participants of bidding, whether public or otherwise, in the Department, speciﬁcally, the Committee for Drugs and Medicines; Cormnittee for Medical, Surgical, Dental Laboratory and Supplies and lastly, Committee for Medical Equipment, Parts, Accessories and Medical Equipment Repair Shops.

III. GENERAL GUIDELINES

Upon the effectivity of this Order, there shall no longer be any accreditation certiﬁcates that can be issued to applicants thereof.

All individuals and/or entities holding existing and valid accreditation certiﬁcates shall be allowed to participate in public bidding without requiring them to re-submit the documents ordinarily required for public bidding by the simple expedience of showing their original accreditation certiﬁcates. This shall be operative up to and until the expiration of the aforementioned accreditation certiﬁcates.

Upon the abolition of the accreditation committees, all personnel previously detailed at their reSpective committees shall return to their assigned ofﬁces and all papers and documents in their possession shall be turned over to the COBAC Secretariat.

In recognition of the need to have a prepared list of bona ﬁde suppliers should the Department resort to Alternative Methods of Procurement under RA. No. 9184, and in lieu of supplier accreditation, the Department shall establish a simpliﬁed supplier registration system (“SSRS”) for goods and/or services that will be subject of the Alternative Methods of Procurement. The SSRS shall be established and maintained by the Central Ofﬁce Bids and Awards Committee (COBAC) Secretariat.

To facilitate the establishment of the SSRS, a manufacturer, supplier, or distributor who has a current and updated ﬁle of his Class “A” documents, as enumerated under Section 23.6, Rule VIII of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA. No. 9184, shall automatically be included in the SSRS. Those manufacturers, suppliers, or distributors who have not submitted and maintained a current and updated ﬁle of their Class “A” documents may submit the said requirements with the COBAC Secretariat to be included in the SSRS roster.

A manufacturer, supplier, or distributor may submit current and updated documents to the COBAC Secretariat on or before the effectivity of any of its Class “A” documents shall have lapsed. Those who fail to do so will be delisted from the SSRS roster until such time that they are able to submit the required current and updated documents.

IV. REPEALING CLAUSE

The following Committees are hereby abolished and their corresponding administrative issuances are repealed/rescinded accordingly, viz:

(1) Committee for Pharmaceutical Products created under A.O. No. 27, series of 1998, later changed to the Committee for Drug Suppliers under A.O. No. 10 dated January 25, 2000, series of 2000; presently the Committee for Drugs and Medicines under A.O. No. 14 dated May 15, 2001, series of 2001;

(2) Committee for Medical, Surgical, Dental Laboratory Supplies and Materials under A.O. No. 8-A dated February 23, 1999, series of 1999 including Department Order No. 33-M dated January 28, 2002, series of 2002; and

(3) Committee for Medical Equipment, Parts, Accessories and Medical Equipment Repair Shops, created under A.O. No. 2-A, series of 1999, as amended by A0. No. 117 dated September 15, 2000, series of 2000, as further amended by A0. No. 33 dated July 6, 2001, series of

2001, by A0. No. 109 dated May 2, 2002, series of 2002, and ﬁnally by A.O. No. 54 dated June 6, 2003, series of 2003.

All other administrative issuances with provisions that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby amended, modiﬁed, repealed and/ or revoked accordingly.

V. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after its publication in at least two (2) new5papers of gener circulation.

      
</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, M.D., MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>