Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>08/27/2004</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 185 s. 2004</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Establishment of the Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDA) in support to Local Health Systems Development</subject>


<body>

I. BACKGROUND:

The process of decentralization brought about by the implementation of Local Government Code otherwise known as R.A.7160 has affected the integration of the health care delivery system. Local interface became a major hindering factor in delivering comprehensive primary health care services in the community. Consequently, this fragmentation of the health care delivery system resulted to the deterioration of the primary health care services specially in geographically isolated and disadvantaged communities.

In 1999, the Department of Health (DOH) launched the Health Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA) in response tothe post devolution problems encountered. One of the reform areas under the HSRA is the Local Health Systems (LHS) Reform where key stakeholders work as partners towards a cohesive and integrated health system. The Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDA) Is an approach to support the implementation of the Local Health Systems Reform in remote, isolated and disadvantaged communities.

The health situation in GIDA'areas is generally characterized by high morbidity and mortality, lack of health facilities and low logistical support resulting to poor access and delivery of quality health services. Morbidity patterns reveals high prevalence of preventable diseases such as TB, measles, diarrhea, malaria and childhood diseases. GIDA speciﬁcally focuses on the health care needs of marginalized and vulnerable groups separated from the mainstream of socio—economic activities.

This order provides the policy for establishment of GIDA.

II. SCOPE AND COVERAGE

This Issuance shall cover the following priority areas:

a. First Priority:

GIDA in 4th to 6th income class municipalities within HSRA convergence sites.

b. Second Priority

GIDA in 4th to 6th income class municipalities in non-HSRA convergence sites including those identiﬁed as KALAHI areas of the National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC).

III. GOALS AND OBJECTIVES

Goal

To establish and institutionalize a system for managing local health development in GIDA communitiesto ensure provision of quality health care services.

Objectives

1. To empower communities, LGUs and Key stakeholders toward good governance for health.

2. To generate LGU and community commitment to manage and sustain health care.

3. To strengthen multi-sectorai linkages through convergence and efﬁcient use of resources.

4. To improve access and provision of health services to GIDAs.

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS

1. Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDA)

Refer to communities with marginalized pepulation physically and socio-economically separated from the mainstream society and characterized by:

1.a. Physical Factors
Isolated due to distance, weather conditions and transportation difﬁculties

Island communities—
Refer to an island barangayimunicipality belonging to the 4th to 6th class, with an area of less than 50,000 hectares and classiﬁed as:
- Isolated at certain period of time due to weather conditions
- Next higher level of care is inaccessible and hard to reach due to transportation difﬁculties
- Quality-health care is limited (e.g. lack of access to health facilities, inadequate and costly health care services)
- Prevailing health Condition is poor - High incidence of leading causes of Infant and maternal deaths
- Indigenous capabilities of peopleifamilies to manage their health needs to be explored
- Existing resources are inadequate (e.g. Limited rural infrastructure, Inadequate access to appropriate technology, limited coverage of public health programs, ..etc)

Upland communities
Group of peeple occupying, tilling or living within lands, terrain classiﬁed as hilly to mountainous: land comprising marginal lands with slopes of 18% or higher: lands within mountain zones including table lands and plateaus lying at high elevation (Reference: Participatory processes to upland development Central Mindanao University)

 

 

\,./

3.

Lowland communities -- _
Refers to coastal/riverbank communities where minority group of
people lives and make a living

Landlocked communities
Refer to a cluster of communities in a valley where they are separated
from the center of activities providing basic services.

Communities with poor access to basic health services

Hard to reach

0 Presence of trails only

0 Lack of or inadequate communication service
4} Schedules or once a'day transportation service
c Ancestral Domain communities

0 . Coastal comiminities

Unserved/Underserved
c Inaccessibility to health facilities
It _ Inadequate educational facilities
Examplesz- Agrarian Reform communities
-, Coastal communities

Lb. Socio Economic factors

High poverty. incidence

Signiﬁcant number of families that have insufﬁcient income to provide
their basic minimum needs In a community. Lack of opportunities in
areas such as health, education, jobs, leisure and inaccessible to
positions of power.

Presence of vulnerable sector

Signiﬁcant number of Indigenous People, farming and ﬁsherfolks,
displaced sector that plays an impact in the socio-economic living
conditions

Communities in or recovering from situations of crisis or armed
conﬂict.

‘ Poor health conditions — poor Maternal Mortality Rate (MMRMnfant
Mortality Rate (IMR) .

Convergence -

Moving towards sharing a common vision and goals to improve coordination and local
health outcbme by foc'using on, and pooling of resources, services and interventions by
Department of Health (DOH), Local Government Units (LGUs), Non—Government
Organizations (NGOs), other Government Agencies (Gas) and other Stakeholders for
the implementation of HSRA in target sites .

. _ 4‘“ to 6“1 Class Municipalities -.

Refers to all municipalities classified as fifth and sixth class under the latest
Department of Finance classiﬁcation.

 

VI. .

Community

A group of people who may share common interest, needs, vision, goals and beliefs
'. occupying a_ particular territory which extends from the ecosystems geographical

political/administrative and cultural boundaries. Actively participates in the

implementation of the site development activities. (Reference: DENR A0 No. 96-29 dated
October 10, 1996 and A0 No. 2000-65 dated AugustTS, 2000)

Reference Group .

A group made up of respected members of the community like community leaders,
health workers, elderly, youth and others purposely organized to address their health
needs. .

POLICY STATEMENTS
1. institutionalize implementation of local health system consistent with HSRA
framework to improve access and availability of quality health services sensitive

_ and responsive to the health needs of the community.

2. Establish collaborative partnership among participating agencies, LGUs, NGOs
and community including resource sharing scheme.

3. Primary Health Care approach shall be employed to develop self sufficient and
self-reliant GIDA community.

4. GIDA shall be considered a priority beneﬁciary In the provision of technical and
‘ ﬁnancial assistance both local and foreign assisted project.

PROGRAM comroNEN'rs

I 1.1. Community Development

0 Community Organization and Mobilization ‘
Mobilization of the'people in a locality to become organized to effectively
participate in local health deveIOpment. It is also a tool to empower and
protect the community’s interest and organize members of the community
and to equip them for joint decision-making and guarantees its Self-reliant
development initiatives. '

0 Community NeedsAnalvsis

' ' Identiﬁcation of health and health —related needs or problems that need
-, immediate attention consistent to the Minimum Basic Needs, this is
aligned with the community’ 3 perspective of priorities based on a
participatory process _

,o Pdrticéoative Community Planning
' A collective multi-sectoral planning by the Community, Health Workers,
, _ Local Government Units (LGUs), other concerned Government Agencies
,, and other stakeholders.

’ o ' Generation and allocation of resources
i The community shall establish income-generating andlor fundraising
projects that will support implementation and sustainability of community
health development initiativesA mechanism to access and utilize local and
external resources shall, likewise,'be established.

 

0 Alliance building and maid-Sectoral Partnership

Partnership among NGOs, other GAS and especially the community in

thastening community processes. To enable communities to develop their
. own community based, self-managed and “sustained health systems and

transform existing political'structures into enabling social infrastructures.

1.2 Provision of Financial and Technical Assistance

0.

Upgrading of health facilities to meet standards for Sentrong Sigla
Certiﬁcation and/or Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PI-11C)
accreditation
Capacity and Capability Building

. Integrated HealthPlanning'

I Health Care Financing

" . Referral System

. Human Resource Management DevelOpment including recruitment
and Retention of health staff

" . . Local Health Information System-

1.3 Monitoring and Evaluation

0
O

GIDA indicators (See GIDA Conceptual Framework)
Documentation of Best Practices

VII. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISM

A."

ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

The Central Office, through the Bureau of Local Health Development (BLHD)
shall have the following roles and responsibilities:

0*

Facilitate development of policies, standards and guidelines on GIDA
implementation

Create: opportunities to develop capabilities of sub-national and local
levels of government -

Provide technical assistance and assist in securing funds to support GIDA
implementation

Establish and maintain database on GlDAs at national level
Develop models and document best practices for replication

~Monitoring'and evaluation of GIDA implementation in coordination with
the CI-IDs

 

2. The Centers for Health Development (CHDs) shall have the following roles
and responsibilities:

G

. Provide technical assistance and assist in securing funds to support GIDA

implementation -
Designate a point person for GIDA implementation
Establish and maintain database .on GIDAs at regional level

Select and recommend areas for GIDA technical assistance and fund
augmentation based on the identiﬁed criteria

Review and recommend sites for national assistance, and for technical
and ﬁnancial assistance by the CHD

3. The Local Government Units (LGUs) shall have the following roles and
~ responsibilities:

O

I}

9

Conduct community dialogue and diagnosis, identiﬁcation of gaps and
needs

Organize inter-agency/inter-sectoral interactive activity with the
community

_ _ Enter into pledge of commitment between LGU and participating
agendies

Support programs/activities for capability building

Ensure that health facilities are manned adequately through recruitment
and sUstainability of medical and allied health workers staff

Provide counterpart assistance to beneﬁciaries

Conduct regular monitoring and evaluation

4. The Community shall have the following roles and responsibilities

‘

«I

§ .

Develop community plan and project pr0posals '
Organize community council/reference group to serve as advisory body

Provide available counterpart resources for GIDA implementation

VIII. CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF GIDA SITES

The following criteria for the selection of GIDAs are set:

I 1. Evidence-of commitment or initial investment of LGU on health programs

- 2. Willingness of LGUs, other partner agencies and sectoral groups to cost—share
and manage the program.

 

3. Willingness of the community to actively participate in the program.

4. Selected areals should be included on the identiﬁed list of priority
Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDA) as recommended by
the CI-IDs based on the deﬁnition stated in section III.

5. availability of community development plan with health as a component

a. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Department of Health
OSEC —1
External Affairs
1 BLHD
CHDs
y . .
Local Government Units

 

Provincial Government

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Municipal Government
Provincial
Health Board ILHZ Board
Municipal
Provincial ‘ . Health Board
Health Ofﬁce TBCh' Mgt.
.. .. Commtttee
Municipal
Health Ofﬁce
GIDA Communities

 

 

 

 

IX. FUNDING
BLHD and CI-IDs with GIDAs shall secure technical and ﬁnancial assistance to support

GIDA implementation. LGUs shall appropriate counterpart contribution of 25% of the
total project cost. Communities are also encouraged to provide counterpart resources.

VIII. EFFECTIVITY

This shall take effect immediately

   

NIANUEL M. DA RITiVID, Sc
Secretary of Health

Qoom. new. .

fuel/rm.

 

 

.wL\ .m ......{kbﬂ f‘¥g~.r.us.

u

'UI

Gd:

a-

les? vf...‘ .31.?

as

(in... If:

Hmeuﬁao Am.

.un.£.).v.d.1.er.\ a???

Owe. ER.“

{MM v

«lemma; ..hht (to)

AAA...

are... Etwtwav trig

Ugh-u

.9»;$.Pere(1%rf.{v ﬁg

maﬁa .o

ten.

and

is“.

 

mama ......

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

wee—cow... .meCHm Humoommm iv. OCﬂuC... Elli-IV OCHOOEm i Lamuﬁnwﬁ _
. . ram neLWMLwaLLALe CLAMMENML Mona. comma: “Leenaawmnr. AL meLwLwemLEn 05....
Lemaaneﬁemw II omeaLnLLLLLLLw. Lees» .- . _ .Q: on nae J.....R :Lm ALLQARLLELELLLTEnew. a o Mohegan...
. FEE QLmaLLLRLLoLL goat $839 . . .
m .. E. m .. . .. .. . . Lea. _ can: ...LLLLAALLeEoLe an Seemed .. _ _ _
0 CW . F: “(Cw Pumnkummuwﬂmcﬁ VHWGMngznww AWHQHSV Gmmwvwmmwﬁmh— ncnﬁmﬁﬁﬁunuﬁ “LAhCW AA” 3:52. HIOnWH mmmmwwmm . .
LALLELS ”33:32 _ .3. A Em. magniﬁed WEE mode: _ . .
. . I... oMMHHMMALWWHA $ _ . .ﬁ Seamed Ea Gammon commanding
romance . IV. ......cLLLnLLLLLmaﬁ . ﬂaw remnuonuﬁ _
... .3 J..“ .erALLL . ....LOLOALLLLLAAELw. LeLeLLL- mean? Lanna... new
on on ....L...“ L M. . Arcana? _ Ewan? ....L.L..:L.LaLLoom can wqammmozmg Edam—L _ gooﬁng.
o.mnoG.LLm mom—3L . . .L.mmeLLLL_L_cem "common 6.3.. .a mound ALE .mwmomozo .AaeALLmzLoE Lea
9335.... .0: mourn... . . VanoEnnm Kenmmnmmna can 3 Lwomoﬁaov _ 38:223mean
magnum. i . _ Reﬁnance can. ASHLEE: . soured LLL 05....
. _ _ _ . . . sheen. an Aegean _ ._ _ Susanna“.
_ . . .4 _ “snowmen. mama on... _ . _.
. m 5 we A." nanLaLLLLLQ. Wondered on
. _ . . .. . on L we La _. mom .3... 07.35%. E . . ...
. . m Fermi _ _ $95322... . . ..v. 0955128. «macaque Luau... . regain Awonnmm no
._ II .. _ . . ... noeLELLLLne. De... manned”. MEAL UAW—23mg
mansions L7... Inna SEA Ema . . . an . . _ ...aeoa a... om. am... _ 0 ALL... . Leases...
_.._ _ . ._ . v03}: mind . 653%; c» . “gag. Hammond Lea been? _ . .. _ . .. . ..m.mchwmoLmeLn.m
._ . ...LdeoELLnaL....¢nLLLLLLsLLoQ_ ”Enhance .. Enema AOL... Schema. momma. .LLawBeeAL Lena Leann em a Les. v we
. noose... scenes... . 4... sauna _ _ uses Essa. so swansemsmaa ....L
_ . . ..FoSAQL amassed. . ._ . . _ L v 33938.3... 00325:... Eco ...Laoeemeg nLELLenOBSLELd at; can .
“Bowman ion a l manned? “meow. . Iv... .Eemmo cm . M 3%.? man... 30.35an mundane and mawwameewcomo: 5 . o.
_ __ . .. ._ .7 VHLanLneaamewEL noEBLLEeL: engraved- 4. .
_ . .vMMLLMLLLM—Hm __ .« ..xmgmm wavered $3153. Moon ”panama Lamina. ..Lwemenmc: ow
_ ..anwnnamoe HE m ...:nomnasnm. “manage: «mama Lem: Le? L m. m . wage: a.
manicure m . e seepage. amassed} .....me madden a...» common. ... 03.30: A an wLoAEALLQ EAL.
_ . . _ . enema . SA. roam. MEAL. . nanosecond 5 League .5 L. . w
wagon woman. I... . Mm ahead? .. 03% Lane»... Ea "Lennon. I . L . ..L . L. L one La 3e...
. . _ _ _ . . . . _ 43L ... .. .. J ammo? Lonesome..." nOmLELLLLme. .8858 Bananas. O: Lo as so a Hawaomoam ...:a Zen
. _ _ REEL Gauze . e a _. QUE. MALES Emneﬁm GOALLWLLLLESEA
. _ _vmee_§ men... _ . some.» on . Kama . . _ _. .. . .
..m of Lee . Lynne... ow OoLLLLLmELoL: amﬁm .. gunned. Lea «35
_ ._ L L.” c. 4 mLLAALdELAnLLm: can. .
. Endgame macaw”. . .. . . 3.3... _. _ ﬁnnoEanLLmamoLLm _ J....eaoawL.a_Lmam
._ WEALLRLLM i reasoned: hwmwama ......mm_mLtL.w_. momma __ managed 8 L533... ransom . .

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

madman AmmL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d.

 

“Remand manned mean?
EMS Reasoning A“... w 0cm.

 

4

 

.LwoeeLaL. LLLAemLaAoa Rhianna.
mammogram . .
Paragon meme: nausea?

 

 

Regan ALLA acumen
Reese: 3. Q53. moan;

. wagon. .RL a: 3532.

QeeﬁnLeaeL in; ma .
enigma 9L Loom roomy.
menace Reagan: E95
m5. “Amway agenda?

 

 

 

_..L. sauna manna
men»: madden.
Racism... .

 

 

 

 

 

 

h...

</body>