Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Trunkline (632) 743-8301 locals 1125,1132, Telefax # (632) 743-1829/743-1786
e-mail: info@doh.gov.ph; web site: www.doh.gov.ph

   
<date>11/12/2004</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 179 s. 2004</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL PREVENTION OF BLINDNESS PROGRAM (NPBP)</subject>


<body> 

I. Background

Blindness as a health problem leads to enormous human suffering, due to the loss of functional ability, and self-esteem. It has considerable economic implication manifestingas either loss of productivity, income and can lead to social dependency.

An estimated 180 million of the world’s population are visually disabled Of these, around 45 million are blind and cannot walk about unaided. Within the Western Pacific Region, World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that there are 8 million people blind Prevalence rates vary from country to country. More than 80% of these 8 million live in only three countries, China, Vietnam and the Philippines.

The 3rd Philippine National Survey of Blindness conducted last year showed that about 3,500,000 (4.62%) Filipinos are visually impaired in one or both eyes. They are either afflicted with bilateral low vision (1.64%), monocular low vision (1.33%), monocular blindness (1.07%), or bilateral blindness (0.58%). Cagayan Valley had the highest prevalence of visual impairment (blind and low vision) which reached 7.75%, while the lowest was found in GARAGA at 1.67%. The age‘ group between 60 to 74 years old showed the highest prevalence rates, while the age groups 0 to 20 age groups had the lowest.

To prevent blindness, all stakeholders, through the leadership of the Department of Health, need to strengthen the Prevention of Blindness Program. The program aims to reduce the current prevalence of bilateral blindness to less than 0.3%. This program also aims to prevent or reduce blindness in long run.

This order prescribes the guidelines for the operation of the National Prevention of Blindness Program.

II. Coverage and Scope

This Administrative Order covers all Health and health related professionals, facilities, offices,bureaus and all other organizations and individuals involved in blindness prevention activities.

III. Definition of Terms

A. Blind — person whose better eye cannot see 3/60 or cannot count fingers at 3 meters.

B. Cataract — results from a change Of transparency of the normal crystalline lens In the eye. This condition causes gradual loss of vision and blindness.

C. Error of Refradtion — is a distance visual acuity of less than 20/30 in one or both eyes (including those with eyeglasses) with no other eye disease present and without confirmation by refraction

D. Low Vision — refers to a person whose better eye cannot see 6/18 (20/70) but can see 3/60 or count fingers at 3 meters.

E. Primary Eye Care -— comprises of simple but comprehensive set of preventive and curative activities that can be carried out by primary health workers.

F. Visual acuity — measurement Of the person’s sharpness of vision. A person’s visual acuity is his abilityto see objects clearly, and this ability is tested by the use Of a visual acuity chart or other ways like ability to count fingers or to perceive light.

G. Vitamin A Deficiency — is a condition in which the body stores of Vitamin A are depleted to the extent that physiological functions are impaired. Depletion of stored Vitamin A occurs over time when the diet contains too little to replace the amount used by tissues.

IV. General Policies

The program shall be guided by the following policies:

A. The DOH as the lead agency for the promotion and protection of people’s health shall ensure the provision of the highest quality of appropriate .eye care through the development of national standards for ethical practice, facility development and service provision.

B. The DOH shall establish strong collaboration and partnership with other stakeholders in all levels of government, all sectors, and civil society, includingthe academe, the medical or paramedical specialty societies, non-government organizations, people’s organizations, business, local government units, and others who can contribute to quality eye care.

C. The DOH and its partners and other stakeholders shall empower and actively involve persons who are at riskof acquiring eye diseases, and those with visual illnesses already and/or the immediate family of these persons in every phase before, during and after the disease process.

D. Eye care providers shall be adequately trained to become competent health providers at every level-of government from the devolved local government units to specialty hOspitals of both government and private sectors by DOH and its partner agencies.

E. Vision 2020 shall be adopted as the framework for evolving strategies and activities in the implementation Of this memorandum.

V. Program Vision, Mission, Goals and Objectives

A. Vision:

All Filipinos enjoy the right to sight by year 2020

B. Mission:

The Department of Health, Local Health Units, partners and stakeholders commit to:
1. Strengthen partnerships among and with stakeholders to eliminate avoidable blindness in the Philippines
2. Empower communities to take proactive roles in the promotion of- eye health and prevention of blindness
3. Provide access to quality eye care services for all
4. Work towards poverty alleviation through preservation and restoration of sight to indigent Filipinos

C. Goal:
 
Reduce the prevalence of avoidable blindness in the Philippines through the provision of quality eye care

D. Objectives

General Objective no 1: Increase Cataract Surgical Rate from 730 to 2,500 by the year 2010

Specific:

1. Conduct 74,000 good outcome cataract surgeries by 2010
2. Ensure that all health centers are actively linked to a cataract referral center by 2008
3. Advocate for the full coverage of cataract surgeries by PhilHealth
4. Establish provincial sight preservation committees in at least 80% of provinces by 2010
5. Mobilize and train at least one primary eye care worker per barangay by 2010
6. Mobilize and train at least one mid- level eye care health personnel per municipality by 2010
7. Improve capabilities of at least 500 Ophthalmologists in appropriate techniques and technology for cataract surgery
8. Develop quality assurance system for all ophthalmologic service facilities by 2008
9. Ensure that 76 provincial, 16 regional and 56 DOH retained hospitals are equipped for appropriate technology for cataract surgery

General objective no 2: Reduce visual impairment due to refractive errors by 10% by the year 2010

1. institutionalize visual acuity screening for all sectors by 2010
2. Ensure that all health centers are actively linked to a referral center by 2008
3. Distribute 125,000 eye glasses by 2010
4. Ensure that hospitals and of health centers have professional eye health care providers by 2010
5. Ensure establishment of equipped refraction centers in municipalities by 2008
6. Establish and maintain an eyeglass bank by 2007

General objective. no 3: Reduce the prevalence of visual disability in children from 0.43% to 0.20% by the year 2010

1. Identify children with visual disability in the community for timely intervention
2. Improve capability of 90% of health workers to identify and treat visual disability In children by 2010
3. Establish a completely equipped primary eye care facility in municipalities by 2008

VI. Program Components

A. Advocacy and Health Education

This includes patient information and education, public information and education and intersectoral collaboration on eye health promotion and the nature and extent of visual impairments particularly its risk factors and complications and the, need/urgency of early diagnosis and management.

B. Capability Building

This component shall focus on ensuring the capability of national and local government health facilities in delivering the appropriate eye health care services especially to the indigent sector Of the population Program shall provide training for coordinators at regional and provincial levels; will ensure the availability of and access to training programs by program implementers. It shall include strengthening treatment/management capabilities of existing personnel and operating capabilities of facilities conducting cataract operations etc. taking into outmost consideration basic quality assurance and standardization of procedures and techniques appropriate to each facility/locality.

C. Information Management

The program shall develop an information management system for purposes Of reporting and recording. As far as practicable, this system shall consider and will build on any existing mechanism. The system shall be national in scope, although the mechanism shall consider the regional and coal needs and capabilities.

D. Networking, Partnership Building and Resource Mobilization

An important component of the program is networking and partnership building .to ensure that services are available at the local level. This shall include public-private and public-public partnerships aimed at building coalitions and networks for the delivery of appropriate eye health care services at affordable cost especially to the indigent sector. This component shall also focus on ensuring that the highest appropriate quality services are made available and accessible to the people.

E. Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation

The program shall be coordinated by a national program coordinator from the Degenerative Disease Office of the National Center for Disease Preventionand Control, Department of Health. The national program coordinator shall oversee , the implementation of program plans and activities with the assistance of the regional coordinators from the Centers for Health Development.

A system of mOnitoring program plans and activities shall be developed and implemented taking into consideration the provisions of the local government code as Well as the organic act of Muslim Mindanao, and any similar issuances/laws that will be passed in the future.

A program review shall be .conducted as needed. Results of program evaluation shall be used in formulating policies, programobjectives and action plans.

F. Research and Development

The program shall encourage the conduct of researches for purposes of developing local competence in eye health care and for other purposes that may be necessary.- The development and dissemination of clinical practice guidelines for eye health shall form part of the research agenda of the program.

The program shall support researches/studies in the clinical behavior (KAP) and epidemiological(trends)areas. It also aims to acquire information that is utilized for continuing public health information and education, policy formulation, planning and implementation.

G. Service Delivery

Service delivery for the Prevention of Blindness Program shall be covered by the principle of best practices. In collaboration with the local government units and stakeholders, the program shall develop systems and procedures for the integration and provision of services at the community level. This means primary prevention concentrating on health education, advocacy and primary eye interventions; Secondary prevention; screening/early detection/basic management/ counseling, referral and/or definitive care and tertiary prevention: management of complications, continuing care and follow up including rehabilitation. The following areas will be the priority areas for services to be provided by the National Prevention of Blindness Program:

1. Cataract Surgeries
2. Errors of Refraction
3. Childhood Blindness

Activities for the Vitamin A Deficiency Disorder, for practical purposes, shall be led by the Family Health Office also of the NCDPC.

A Referral System shall form” part of services delivered by the program. This is to ensure that all patients receive quality eye health care at appropriate levels OfIhealth care delivery system. All rural health units should be linked to an eye. care referral center.

VII. Roles and Responsibilities

A. Roles and Responsibilities

1. Department of Health - Central Office shall develop systems, policies and guidelines that will facilitate the implementation of the Prevention of Blindness Program including the monitoring and evaluation of program strategies. Develop the capacity Of CHD personnel in assisting the LGUs in implementing the Prevention of Blindness Program at the local level.

As such, the following offices shall have the following responsibilities:

a. The National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC) shall (a) develop the system for the implementation of the National Prevention 'Of Blindness Program; (b) provide technical assistance and conduct monitoring and evaluate program operation.(c) lead in the formulation Of the health intervention and rehabilitation programs and strategies that will reduce the burden and consequences of eye diseases and disabilities and promote visual health and (d) ensure the participation of other DOH offices in program activities where needed.

b. The National Center for Health Promotion shall assist the NCDPIC in the formulation of standards and development of information, education and communication (IE0) and advocacy strategies for the prevention of blindness program to ensure the promotion of a healthy and less stressful lifestyle for the Filipinos, as well as to help in ensuring that the public has knowledge of services being offered as part of the program.

c. The National Epidemiology Center and the Information Management Service shall assist NCDPC in the development of a national reporting and surveillance system as well as the development of methodologies for the generation, collection and distribution of information and knowledge on the possible establishment of the national registry for blind persons.

d. The Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau shall (a) assist in the proper and effective implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the National Prevention of Blindness Policy; (b) ensure its'formulation into a national program plan of action; (c)‘assist in developing a health financing scheme/protocol for eye health bare services together with the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation; and (c) the inclusion of the prevention of blindness in the priorities for the health research agenda.

e. The Health Human Resource Development Bureau shall assist in (a) the development of standards in the curriculum and the training of all types of health professionals, practitioners, and care providers who are responsive, sensitive, which should be consistent with the national and local human development goals and culture; (b) the adequate and equitable distribution of health manpower through provision and protection of plantilla positions in the health care delivery system at the national and regional levels; and (c) the provision of a good incentive and benefit program to attract health caregivers in the unserved and underserved areas.

f. The Bureau of International Health Cooperation shall ensure that the program has strong network linkages with international health institutions, agencies, units that will continually ensure the inclusion, participation, cooperation and collaboration of the Philippines in the global scene for the prevention of blindness.

g. The Bureau of Local Health Development shall assist in the integration of quality eye care 'into local health system development.

h. The Centers for Health Development shall facilitate the implementation of procedure/guidelines in the LGU pilot areas for the Prevention of Blindness Program from ground working and situational analysis to finalizing the commitment of the key player (DOH, LGU, PHIC, private sector, NGOs, etc.) provide technical assistance to LGUs in selecting program strategies and assist the LGUs in cOordinating the actual implementation of the chosenprogram strategies and activities.

i. DOH hospitals and medical centers shall ensure the availability of quality eye care services to its clients through the establishment of appropriate capabilities and competencies in their respective units.

2. Local Government Units- should organize themselves into inter-local Health zones that will manage the implementation of Prevention Of Blindness Program strategies and activities. LGUs shall pass the necessary local legislation (ordinances, resolutions) to implement program strategies. Provide counterpart funds for implementing their investment plan.

3. The National Committee for Sight Preservation (NCSP) - a non-profit organization composed of GOs, NGOs and academe involved in prevention of blindness and promotion of eye health programs, activities and-projects, as well as to act as an advisory group to the Department of Health’s National Prevention of Blindness Program. It will be the lead partner agency of the Department of Health in ensuring that the Prevention of Blindness Program is implemented nationwide, in strong collaboration with local government units, non-government agencies and other concerned organizations and government agencies.

4. Professional Organizations for eye health care, specifically but not limited to the Philippine Academy of Ophthalmology and the different Optometric organizations, shall ensure the availability of competent, efficient and culturally and gender sensitive eye care health professionals in all provinces in the Philippines.

5. Civil Societies - shall 1) assist the Local Government Units in achieving their health Objectives 2) shall identify the health needs of the people and bring to the attention of the inter-local health zones 3) enhance accountability and transparency of inter-local health zone management.

6. Donor Agencies - shall provide funding assistance according to the investment plan developed for the Prevention of Blindness Program.

VIII.. Implementing Mechanisms

A. Program Administration

The Prevention of Blindness Program shall be one of the programs of the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control, which may later become a sub-component of the center’s program for persons with disabilities.

Program administration shall focus on the following guiding principles 1) leadership of the Department of Health, Center for Health Development and stakeholders 2) intersectoral coordination and collaboration 3) flexibility and adaptability to situations 4) strengthening linkages and networking 5) COSt sharing initiatives.

B. Coordination with Other NCDPC Program and DOH Offices

To ensure a comprehensive approach to blindness prevention, coordination-with the other programs (Maternal and Child Health and Nutrition Program) and other DOH Offices such as the National Center for Health Facility Bureau and the Bureau of Health Facilities and Standards shall be instituted.

C. The Program Management Committee (PMC)

For the years 2005 - 2010, a Program Management Committee (PMC) shall be organized to ensure the implementation of the National Sight Plan. The Program Management Committee shall be chaired by the Director IV, National Center for Disease Prevention and Control, with the Chair of the National Committee forSight Preservation as vice—chair. The composition, other roles and responsibilities of this PMC shall be spelled out in a Department Order that will be issued for this purpose. The Undersecretary for Health Operations shall have over—all supervision of the program.

The Program Management Committee (PMC) shall be the main coordinating body for the program. Its members shall include the Division chief of the Degenerative Disease Office in charge of this program, the national focal person for this program and a representative from the league of municipalities, Philippine Academy of Ophthalmology, two representatives from the. Optometry group and two representatives from the NGO-Igroup. Members who represent their organizations in this committee shall be those nominated by their respective organizations which may be renewed or replaced annually.

The Project Management Committee (PMC) shall have the following responsibilities:
1. Recommends to the Secretary of Health activities and plans
2. Monitoring of implementation of program activities
3. Others as may be identified and approved by the Secretary of Health

IX. Funding

The Department of Health and the Centers for Health Development shall provide funds for technical assistance, monitoring and advocacy campaigns (IEC materials). Furthermore, the local government units, NGOs and stakeholders shall contribute counterpart funds to ensure the implementation of the National Prevention of Blindness Program.

X. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>