Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health

OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

2nd Flr. Bldg. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. 743-8301 local 1134, 1107; 711-95-02 to 03; Fax 743-1829


<date>04/04/2005</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2005-0010</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Department of Health Retained Hospitals to engage in wholesale procurement and distribution of essential drugs</subject>


<body>

The sustained efforts of the Government to enhance the welfare of the public led to various innovations in the systems and institutional support structures in the Department of Health (DOH). Among the innovations that improved the efficiency of the DOH, particularly, the Hospitals under its direct supervision, are clearly defined rules and procedures in the procurement of low cost medicines and mechanisms like consignment (Administrative Order No. 145 s. 2004, Revised Policies and Guidelines for the Institutionalization and Decentralization of the Department of Health Drug Consignment System) and direct contracting based on actual demand patterns (Administrative Order No. 34-A s. 2003, Guidelines to Fast-Track Procurement of Specific Essential Drugs and Medicines by the different Department of Health Hospitals based on Actual Demand Patterns) within the framework of the Procurement Reform Law also known as Republic Act (RA) 9184.

At the current state, the DOH Hospitals are authorized to sell low cost medicines to individual patients who are capable of paying. Such payments are infused into the Drug Revolving Trust Funds that caused the DOH Hospitals to become more financially adaptable to price changes and efficient in precluding stock-outs. This relative adaptive effiency of the DOH Hospitals is advocated by the DOH to be replicated in other Hospitals or other service facilities that dispense medicines to the public. Issues on economies of scale, however, confront smaller service facilities which cannot be adequately solved through transfer of knowledge and technology. The logical solution to the preceding is the provision of a common facility for pooled procurement, where the DOH Hospitals will serve as procurement and distribution hubs. This proposed solution, however, is in itself not adequate considering the presence of formal constraints, like the lack of authority and mechanism for DOH Hospitals to undertake wholesale procurement and distribution to entities. The current authority of DOH Hospitals in rendering pooled procurement service, highly variable prices for the same drugs within the geographic locality, limited access to low cost medicines, lack of economies of scale in procurement.

To preclude such adverse implications, the Department of Health had envisaged that the DOH Retained Hospitals become procurement and distribution hubs of various organizational entities that will further enhance their financial status and be champions for equitable access to low cost medicines.

II. Objectives

This issuance is created in order to:

1. Grant authority to DOH Retained Hospitals to undertake wholesale procurement and distribution activities;

2. Provide mechanisms for the establishment and implementation of pooled procurement facility using the DOH Retained Hospitals; and 

3. Provide an alternative regulatory path for DOH Hospital Pharmacies to assume wholesale distribution functions.

III. Scope and Coverage

This Order shall be applicable to all DOH Retained Hospitals in the conduct of wholesale procurement of essential drugs, which shal be for re-sale/distribution to organizational entities with duly established retail drugstore or hospital pharmacies like the Local Government Units, the Botika ng Barangays, and Drugstore operated by Cooperatives/Non-Government Organizations (NGOs)/Community Based Organizations (CBOs) who wish to participate in the low cost quality medicines availability program of the Government also known as the Gamot Mabisa Abot Kaya (GMA) Project.

IV. Policies and Guidelines

1. All DOH Hospitals shall be authorized to undertake wholesale procurement and wholesale of medicines to organizational entities as mentioned in the Scope and Coverage of this Order subject to compliance to certain regulatory requirements imposed by the ureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD) per Administrative Order (AO) No. 56 s. 1989. Organizatons who wish to participate shall execure a Memorandum of Agreement between them and the host DOH Hospital reflecting therein their commitment to undertake activities and adhere to policies reflected in this Order.

2. The DOH Hospitals shall be exempt from the following regulatory requirement for license as wholesaler:
a. A valid contract with BFAD licensed supplier/manufacturer;
b. License to Operate of supplier/manufacture; and
c. Payment of Opening Fee

However, the DOH Hospitals must submit the list of drug suppliers under its Simplified Supplier Registry System with a certification that such suppliers are licensed by BFAD and comply with current good manufacturing practices (cGMP), in lieu of the above-excepted documentary proofs.

All other requirements under AO 56 shall still be in effect.

3. The assigned Pharmacist(s) under the retailing operations of the DOH Hospitals may be the same Pharmacist(s) for wholesaling to preclude additional documentary requirement submissions and thus streamlining the process for acquiring license as wholesaler.

4. Once, a license as wholesaler is obtained from BFAD, the DOH Hospitals may coordinate with prospective beneficiaries of the low cost quality medicines using its pooled procurement facility. Also, it shall post in conspicuous place or in its website/or in the DOH website the price list of durgs it procures to serve as basis for the procurement request of the end-users.

5. The DOH hospital shall collect remittances from the participants of the low cost quality medicine project to cover the procurement of common essential drugs and may impose a four percent (4%) administrative charge for the procurement and distributions services it rendered. The revenue arising from the 4% administrative charge shall be used as infusion fund that will be accounted for in the Drug Revolving Trust Fund of thte DOH Hospital to further strengthen its purchasing power for low cost quality medicines.

6. Simultaneous with the transfer of remittances, from the end-user organizations to the DOH Hospital, shall be the submission of the former of their respective procurement request for essential drugs, stating therein the generic name, dosem dosage form, and total quantity demanded. The quantity requested shall be subject to adjustments as a consequence of price changes, albeit, such adjustments shall be mutually agreed upon. The funds and inventories for wholesale shall be reflected distinctly in a separate book of accounts.

7. The choice of supplier shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Procurement Reform Law (RA 9184) and quality standard protocols imposed by the BFAD and other agencies like the Commission on Audit (COA).

8. The conduct of the wholesale procurement activity may coincide with the regular biddings of the DOH Hospitals or shall be sequenced and timed so as to accommodate the most number of request for common procurement.

9. Only drugs under the latest edition of the PNDF shall be procured and distributed.

10. The money equivalent to the quantity of essential drugs not procured by the DOH Hospitals shall be immediately returned back to the end-user organizations within a reasonable time mutually agreed upon or as provided by existing relevant statutes.

11. The end-user organizations shall be allowed to exact a mark-up not exceeding thirty percent (30%) of the transfer price from the DOH Retained Hospitals or as may be determined by the DOH Hospital in comparison to the prevailing market price. The mark-up shall in no case result to a higher retail price that 50% of the prevailing market price. A progressive mark-up structure may be devised by the DOH Hospitals that is drug or drug type specific provided that such will not exceed the 30% mark-up ceiling or will not result to a price higher than 30% of what is prevailing in the market.

12. The selling price of the transferred drugs shall be subject to price monitoring by the DOH and other concerned Government Agencies. The DOH Retained Hospitals shall thus post in a conspicuous place or in its website or in the DOH website the generic name, the quantity, the unit transfer price, the maximum retail price, and total price of the essential drugs transferred to the beneficiary end-user entities. Similarly, the end-user entities shall post the preceding information in the same manner.

13. An incentive system may be provided initially by the Department of Health to prospective end-user organization beneficiaries subject to specific guidelines that shall be issued by the DOH and as shall be embodied in a notarized Memorandum of Agreement between the DOH and said beneficiaries.

14. In all instances, the DOH Hospitals should emphasize in the MOA between it and the beneficiary entities (e.g. LGUs and other Government participating hospitals like those under the Department of National Defense, Community Based Drug Outlets, etc.) that the responsibility of pick-up of allocated drugs should be vested on the latter and should be time-bound to prevent congestion in the storehouse of the DOH Hospitals.

V. Separability Clause

If any partm term or provision of this Order shall be declared invalid or unenforceable, the vailidty or the enforeceability of the remaining parts or provisions shall not be affected, and this Order shall be construed as if it did not contain the particular invalid or unenforceable part, term, or provision.

VI. Repealing Clause

Provisions of previous issuance inconsistent with those provided hereon are deemed amended and modified accordingly.

VII. Effectivity

This Order shall be effective immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
