Republic of the Philippines 
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. 1, San Lazaro Cmpd., Rizal Avenue
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines 1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-9502, 711-9503 and 781-4362; Telefax No. (632) 743-1829

<date>07/25/2006</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006 - 0025</docnum>

<subject>Subject : Guidelines Establishing the Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System (HCRSIS)</subject>

<body>
I. Rationale

In line with the current thrust of the Department of Health (DOH) as prescribed in Administrative Order No. 2005-0023 entitled "Implementing Guidelines for Fourmula One for Health as Framework for Health Reforms," particularly in fulfilling the objectives assuring the quality and affordability of health goods and services, the DOH has envisaged in establishing a system for reference standards for health commodities.

The establishment of the health commodities reference standards is envisaged to pave the way for greater transparency in the choice of health goods such that cost-effectiveness will transpire and that prices will be lowered as a consequence of greater competition between and among the suppliers of health commodities. Furthermore, the establishment of such a system will reduce errors arising from wrong specifications that are contributory to unnecessary administrative delays and administrative and legal faux pas.

The Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System shall be in accordance with the requirements of Republic Act 9184 also known as the Procurement Reform Law considering that it would enhance greater participation among firms and reduces asymmetry in information. It widens the spectrum for participation because it will prescribe specifications that are more generic.

II. Purpose and Objectives

This Order is hereby created to serve the following purposes and objectives:

1) Creation of a functional organizational entity, which shall provide advice and recommendation on the reference specification of drugs and other health commodities for procurement and distribution;

2) Identify the specific roles, responsibilities and coordinating relationships of other entities and units in the DOH who are involved in the mechanisms for resource allocation as a consequence of their mandate;

3) Provide guidelines and procedure for the determination of the appropriate reference specification of drugs and other health commodities that are for procurement and distribution.

III. Scope and Coverage

This Order shall be applicable to all Offices and Units under the Department of Health. Health units and offices under the administrative and operational control of the other Agencies of the Government, including those under the Local Government Units are encouraged to adhere on the prescriptions of this Order.

IV. General Guidelines

1) A Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification shall be created and shall be composed of the following:

a) Chairperson who is at least a Director level or equivalent in the DOH. The Chairperson may be chosen from among the Offices listed in IV.1) c).

b) Program Manager of the National Drug Policy Program-Pharmaceutical Management Unit-50 as ex-officio Co-Chairperson;

c) Representatives from the following Units/Offices as Permanent Members:

i. Philippine Health Insurance Corporation;
ii. National Center for Disease Prevention and Control;
iii. National Center for Health Facilities and Development;
iv. Bureau of Food and Drugs;
v. National Epidemiology Center;
vi. Health Emergency Management Staff;
vii. Bureau of Health Devices and Technology
viii. Procurement Division;
ix. Material Management Division;
x. Formulary Executive Council (National Formulary Committee);
xi. Bureau of Health facilities and Services;
xii. Center for Health and Development;
xiii. Retained Hospital

d) Non-Permanent Members may be invited by the Committee Chairman on the basis of their expertise to specific matters that may be tackled by the Committee.

2) The Chairperson and the Members of the Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification shall be covered with the appropriate Department Personnel Order.

3) The Procurement Division, together with the Information Management Service, shall be the Secretariat of the Committee and shall be the main repository of all the documents related to the Committee's work.

4) The Members of the Committee shall be functionally constituted into three sub-committees, which are:

a) Sub-Committee for Drugs - Chairperson, the representative of FEC with Co-Chair from BFAD

b) Sub-Committee for Health Equipment, Devices, and Supplies - Chairperson, the representative of the Bureau of Health Devices and Technology, with Co-Chair from PHIC

c) Sub-Committee for Office Equipment and Supplies - Chairperson, the representative of the Procurement Division with Co-Chair from IMS

5) The Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification, in particular the sub-committees under it, shall identify and recommend the reference specifications of drugs and other health commodities for procurement by the DOH or by other procurement entities.

6) The output of the Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification will be the List of Approved Reference Specification for Health Commodities which shall be transformed into a computer-based Library and shall be posted in the DOH website in accordance with the with the pertinent provisions of Republic Act No 9184 also known as the Procurement Reform Law. Such library shall be regularly reviewed and updated every quarter by the Committee.

7) The Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification, in particular the sub-committees under it, shall also be responsible for recommending the specific procedures and criteria for the inclusion, deletion and revision of the Health Commodities that would form the content of the computer-based Library.

8) All procurements of the Department of Health shall be based on the approved Health Commodity specification. An end-user may thus reflect and certify in their procurement documents that they have verified the correctness of the specifications of the item to be procured and such is included in the HCRSIS. Such certification shall effectively supplant the need to obtain clearances from "clearing houses" for correctness of specifications.

9) Specifications that shall be considered for reference shall be those that ensure greater participation of firms in the market, except for those that are still covered with patents but are still considered as essential by the appropriate unit of the DOH.

10) The primary bases for inclusion of specifications in the HCRSIS shall be their relevance to Philippine health situation, cost effectiveness and consistency with approved clinical practice guidelines. Other specific bases shall be determined by the Committee and shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of Health.

V. Specific Guidelines

A. Preparation of Approved Health Commodities Reference Specification Library

1) The criteria for the inclusion, revision and deletion of a reference specification shall be prepared by the Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification and must be approved by the Secretary of Health. Such approval shall be in the form of an administrative issuance. The detailed preparation of such criteria shall be vested to the different sub-committees.

2) The Sub-Committees shall prepare the list of items that are candidates for inclusion, revision and deletion and the corresponding reasons for such and a transmittal letter Recommending Approval of the said list. The said list shall be duly noted by the Chairperson of the Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification, and shall be endorsed for transmittal to the Undersecretary of Health for Regulations for final approval, "By Authority of the Secretary of Health." The sub-committees shall decide on what to be reflected on the list in a collegial manner. No specifications shall be included in the List unless and until dissenting opinions are resolved.

3) The Members and Officers of the Committee may conduct post-audit evaluation on the submissions of the sub-committees for purpose of enhancing current rule system so that these will be adaptively efficient and may recommend the necessary changes on the criteria for the inclusion,

4) The sub-committees shall review and update the current list of approved health commodities' specification at least every quarter or as often as practicable. The approved List must be posted within two weeks after the end of each quarter, if there are updates or when necessary.

5) Once the list of health commodities specifications is approved, the sub-Committee concerned shall forward the approved list to the Information Management Service for posting in the DOH website.

B. Use of the Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System

1) The Department of Health shall maintain a database reference information system containing the approved list of health commodities specifications. Such system shall be used by the sub-committees for the process of inclusion, revision and deletion of specifications.

2) The users of the system shall be explicitly identified and authorized in order to gain access. Each user shall be given a specific level of authority and password, who will ensure the observance of the appropriate security protocol in accordance with Republic Act No. 8792 also known as the E-Commerce Law.

3) The Information Management Service shall be the main unit that shall be responsible in maintaining the appropriate security protocol for access. It shall be responsible in providing and updating passwords and conducting audits that would ensure the integrity of the system and its contents.

4) The Officers and Members of the sub-committees shall be the only authorized personnel who can include, revise and delete the reference specification.

5) The different offices and units of the DOH shall be granted access by way of viewing, querying, and copying only. Albeit, they may use a feature in the system to suggest items for inclusion, deletion, and revision and the corresponding reasons behind such suggestions.

6) The Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System shall be under the technical maintenance of the information Management Service, with the Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification as the administrative end-user.

7) The Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System shall be linked with the DOH website and with the websites of other Government Agencies for wider dissemination and advocacy.

8) All Centers for Health Development and Retained Hospitals shall be given access to the Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System.

C. Monitoring, Training and Planning Considerations

1) The Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification shall prepare a Work and Financial Plan (WFP) that would ensure the use and the deployment of Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System. The WFP shall also include training, advocacy and monitoring requirements. The Fund required to operationalize the Information System shall be lodged to the Information Management Service.

2) The WFP shall be submitted by the Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification to the Undersecretary of Health for Regulations or the Undersecretary duly designated by the Secretary of Health for final approval.

3) The Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification shall provide status and accomplishment reports to the Undersecretary of Health for Regulations at every six (6) months, i.e. every July and January covering the preceding months.

4) The Committee on Health Commodities Reference Specification shall likewise be tasked to recommend policy options to ensure wider acceptance of the Health Commodities Reference Specification Information System. Such options may include legislative and executive issuances that are necessary as compelling factors for wider use of the system.

D. Coordinating Instructions and Arrangements

1) The Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) shall be enjoined to ensure that the list of health commodities (e.g. essential drugs, diagnostic kits, medical devices/supplies), etc), excluding other and non-health commodities, reflected in HCRSIS are those that could be eligible for reimbursements. The necessary Health Technology Assessment (HTA) support shall be provided by PHIC to the Committee on HCRS to ensure that decisions for inclusion of specification are based on evidence, and cost effectiveness, among other scientific criteria.

2) The Committee on HCRS shall coordinate with the Commission on Audit to ensure advocacy on the use of the HCRSIS to the Local Government Units in their procurement of health commodities.

VI. Repealing Clause

The provisions of previous issuances, which are inconsistent with those provided in this Order, are hereby rescinded and modified accordingly.

VII. Separability Clause

If any provision in these guidelines or application of such provision to any circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of these guidelines shall not be affected.

VIII. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>