Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1 San Lazaro Compound Rizal Avenue
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-9502, 711-9503 and 781-4362 Telefax No. (632) 743-1829


<date>02/05/2007</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006-0033-A</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Amendments to Administrative Order No. 2006-0033, entitled: “Guidelines for the DOH-PITC Expanded Drug Access Pilot Program using Convenience Stores as BNB Express Outlets”</subject>


<body>

I. Rationale

Administrative Order No. 33 series 2006 was formulated in order to identify areas of collaboration between the Department of Health (DOH) and Philippine International Trading Corporation (PITC) in relation to the Expanded Drug Access Pilot Program. The main intent of the policy issuance is to provide essential medicines for the operation of selected Botika ng Barangay (BnB) as well as PITC accredited convenience stores, which serve as distribution network of the Botika ng Bayan (BNB) Program. The strategy promotes equity in health by ensuring the accessibility and availability of quality essential drugs. Thus, the cited AO was promulgated to provide a cognitive use of drugs and medicines through rational system of procurement and distribution.

An evaluation of the AO’s Implementation suggested that certain ﬁne—tuning should be undertaken especially in the aspect of expediting processes and procedures related to the training of operators and the monitoring of outlets. It has been realized that it would be the better policy to dislodge the responsibility of identifying and accrediting the convenience stores that would constitute the BNB express outlets. DOH, in turn, would provide inter-agency technical assistance to PITC to synergize current strategies. This amendment therefore is to provide a clearer deﬁnition of roles and responsibilities of DOH, PITC and other stakeholders.

II. General Guidelines

A. Amendment to Section V (J) of A0 no. 2006-0033, which states that:

“(J) The BFAD shall ensure the timely issuance of SLTO in accordance with the conditions set forth in this Order as well as those stipulated in A0 144 s. 2004.”

The foregoing provision is hereby amended and read as follows:

“(J) The BFAD shall ensure the timely issuance of SLTO in accordance with the conditions set forth in this Order as well as those stipulated in A0 144 s. 2004, Provided that, the inspection of the BNB Express Outlet shall not be a mandatory requirement for the issuance of the SLTO, Provided further that inspection shall be conducted as a post market surveillance requirement.

For purposes of this Order, the following shall serve as additional requirement for the issuance of SLT O, to wit:

1. Business permit from the Local Government Unit (LGU) or from Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).
2. Certiﬁcate of training of BNB Express, Outlet operator.”

B. Amendment to Section V (K) of A0 no. 2006-0033, which states that:

“(K) Accredited and licensed BNB Express Outlet owners and/or operators shall only be allowed to sell drugs and medicines after they have successfully undergone a technical training course provided initially by DOH through CHDS.” 

The foregoing provision is hereby amended and read as follows:

“(K) Accredited and licensed BNB Express Outlet owners and/0r operators shall only be allowed to sell drugs and medicines after they have successfully undergone a technical training course to be conducted by the PIT C under the supervision of the CHD. The CHD shall issue a certiﬁcation after accomplishment of the training course. The cost of such training shall be borne by the PIT C.”

C. The following provision shall be added to Section VI (C) and shall be read as:

“4. Each BNB Express Outlet shall maintain a Record Book/Prescription Book in monitoring the patients for possible adverse effects upon intake of the purchased drug from the outlet. This in turn will be reported to BFAD by PITC.”

III. Separability Clause

If any provision in these Guidelines, or application of such provision to any circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this Order shall not be affected.

IV. Repealing Clause

The provisions of previous issuances, which are inconsistent with those provided in this Order shall be deemed repealed and modiﬁed accordingly.

V. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>