Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

   
<date>05/10/2006</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006-0024</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing the Accreditation Laboratories for Drinking Water Analysis</subject>


<body>

I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND:

In order to secure public health and safety, Presidential Decree 856 also known as the Sanitation Code of the Rhliippines mandates the Department of Health to accredit laboratories performing examination of drinking water in accordance with the National Drinking Water Standards. In 1979, Administrative Order No. 31 was issued containing the Requirements for the Accreditation of Water Analysis Laboratories implemented by the Bureau of Research and Laboratories of the Department of Health.

The enactment of Executive Order No. 102 s. 199er which rewdirects the functions and operations of the Department of Health, transferred the reguiatory functions of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories to the Bureau of Health Facilities and Services. The other technical functions of the Bureau oi Research and Laboratories were distributed among the designated National Reference Laboratories by virtue of Department Order No 393- E s. 2000.

The safety and potability of drinking water is a public health concern, which can be safeguarded by accurate and reliable results generated by testing facilities complying with quality standards stated in the Philippine National Standards for Drinking Water. Recognizing the need to maintain and safe guard water quality Republic Act 9275 known as the Philippine Clean Water Act of 2004 was enacted and the Department of Health, was tasked to be responsible for the promulgation revision and enforcement of drinking water standards It is for this purpose that the Bureau of Health Facilities and Services in coordination with the National Reference Laboratory for Environmental and Occupational Health Toxicology and Micronutrient AsSay, as stipulated in their mandates are tasked to evaluate and monitor the duaiity of services rendered by these water testing laboratories nationwide through the implementation of these mice and regulations in accordance with existing policies and scientiﬁcally accepted practices.

::, _ ,.-..engaged In the preIIIeIeh of health geede and services III ee far as the: were
_ i'sImIiarly gevemecl by technical guideiihes and standaIds mandated by the IOH;

 

 

II. JECTIE:

 

Te pIetect whim heahh safety and weifare by eneunng the. accuracy, preeIsmn
and reIIabIIIty ef reeutts geherated by drinking water teshhg iaboretohes through
fermulatmn aga'sdienfereemeht {3? revised standards fer acerecistaheh

   

' III. PEI CVERAGE:

  
   

These ruiee and regulations shall appty I0 aII Department 0f HeaIth
IncludI‘ng- Its attached agencies InvelvecI In the ehfercement ef drmkmg water stand
all teetmg laluretahes naIIehWIde """ _ H

 
  
  
  
 

 
 

pmgresaﬁect puhlIc heehh and these governed by Iechmeei gwde Ines and st?
..~:;:iégandated by the DCIH It further severe prIvate ehtItIes (pereens and en

 

LeibeIa‘IQIiéee fer purer academic training asncilor reaea-Ich and other la
performing Inwhuse mQITITDI'II’Ig ehaii not be governed by these rules and: I'eguiiaéte

 

IV DEFINITION OF TERMS:

A Accredltatlen a I‘ermal euthehzaheh Issued by the DOH Ie an Indmduai
partnershm, corporatien or aesomatzoh seeking te perferm cirIIIIthg water
analyse III comp-Hence with the requII’emehte as pIeSCIIhed III the Order

I. AppIIcant —-.~ an individuai partnership ceremation or aseeeIatIeh seekmg an
a.j::-3screditah0h to eperate and maintain a drinking water Ieetmg IaCIlIty

C. DHFS acrtnym fer the Bureau 01‘ Health Facilities and Semces of the DOH It ehaII
exermse the reguiatery function previded m IhIel .rcier .

D. CHI acronym fer the Centers fer Health Develepment the regienal efhces ef. the '
DOH

E. DIH aerenym for the Department of Health

'FI Laboratory refers In the Drinking Water AnerSIs Laheratory his a faCIiIty that

perferme either hacteheiogmai bieIegicel phyaIcaI chemIeal and radwllgleai }
analyse er a combinatien of any Of these methede III determme the pctainIty
and safety 0f water.

G NRL—~ refers to the designated Natienai Reference Laberatery fer EnVImnm—entat endi
Occupatmna! Health TexImI Iggy and MICIOhutIIenI Assay

H PNSDW «aagsirenym fer the PhIin-pIhe Netiona! Standards III Drinking Water.

 

J

 

uaitty Manual «- docoments stating the quality policy and describing the quality

system and quality procedures intended for the overeli manning and
administration of activities which effect the quality of isboretory services

ﬁu~atrtg Poiicy» statements of intentions or desires of the organization with respect

' to management of their oustity system

Specimen co tiected drinking water sample submitted for analysis to determine its

potehiiity and safety.

tandard Method - methods of aneiysis as prescribed in the PNSDW sndr’or the

Standard Method for the Examination of Water and Waste Water (joint
action of the American Public Health Association (APHA), American;
Waterworks Association (AWWA), and Water Pollution Controi Federetion
(WPCF))2

Water Analysis -— testing procedurefs such as becterioiogic, biologic, ohysicei,

chemicei, radioiogicei? pert-armed on a water sample

PCHCIES AND GUIDELiNES:

zi‘ieeherai Poiicies:

 

The EHFS shail exercise its reguietory function for the in: itiei issuance of the
:z‘iisiertrt sets of Accreditation and the CHD shall be resoonsrhle for the renews-xi of

  

25:1; The NHL shall conduct proficiency testing confirmatory testing end personnei
"training reietive to the accreditation of the iahoreiories

Lehoratories shall not operate without a valid Certificate of Accreditation

An accreditation shall be granted in accordance with prescribed accreditation
standards and technical requirements and on the basis of specific conditions and

itetions estebiished during the survey

 

f Aii accredited isboretories sheii be given one (1) year from approvsi end

publication of these rules and reguiations to meet the new accreditation

' reqwrements

The :BHFS/CHD on its own or based on compisint or charges dui y sworn to by any

person interested party or corporation against a laboratory or its personnei to the
effect that an accredited lehoretory have violated or are violating the orcwsrons
shall investigate and after due hearing may modify suspend or revoke the
accreditation of a laboratory for such period and under such terms may be

necessary to ensure fuii relieoiiity and accuracy of water analysis and its results.

 

 

'~ (552.1. The accreditation of ieooreiories may be suspended «or revoked by the BHFSICHED
' * eirector upon vioietioo of these ruies and regoietione or the commission of the
foiiowing acts by the persons owning or operating the i‘eooreiory and the persons
under their authority:
7.1 issuance of freorioieoi water testing resoits.
7.2 Change in the ownership, location. and head of the laboratory orpersonoei
without informing the BHFSJCHD.
7.3 Rotosei to eiiow survey or monitoring visits of the laboratory by the perso-ois
authorized by the BHFSICHD at an appropriate time.
7.4 Refusei to participate in the proficiency testing conducted by the NRL.
7.5 Any msteriei ieise statement in the eppéiioation.

8 . if upon monitoring visits. the iehoretory is found to be vioieting thee-e roiiee em
‘ reg-oiatione. the BHFSICHD may immediateiy preventive-i3; suspend the osoeretioeo
of the said laboratory. Preventive suspension sheii not be more than sixty (50)

days.

 

. "flifirny iehoratory or any of its personnei aggrieved by the decision of the BHFS iCiiiB
‘37}! -. gey within fifteen (‘15) days: after receipt of notice of decision. iiie a notice of
- appear! with the Offioe oi the Secretary and serve a copy of the notice of eppeei to
:i:i:%:izi;3‘:;. ' ' ' the BHFSICHD. Thereooon. the BHFSICHD shoii promptiy oeriity and iiie e oooy of
j . the decision inciooing the transcript of hearings on which the Cieoieion is beseo with
the Office of the Secretary for review. The decision of the Office of the Seoreiery

siheii be fine! and executory.

 

120. *ziri'éubmiiteo applications that are not processed within sixty (55) oer-ye sheii be

granted the Certificate of Accreditation.

 

11 A iaboratory that is a onitr’seoiionioivision of a ciiniosi ieooretory sheii no tongozr he

' required to secure a separate accreditation provided that eooreoitetioo stensrierrzis
end technioai requirements to perform examination of drinking wetter heat been
met. Hence. the oennission to perfon'n examination of drinking ‘weter eheii he
inciocisd in; the License to Operate a ciinicei ieboratory.

12 Laboratories shaii be otessiiied according to:
72.1 Ownership:

8, Government - operated and maintained partiaiiy or who-Hy by the rietionei,
provinciai. city or municipal government. or other poiiticei oeit. or by any
department. division. board or agency thereof.

b. F’rivaate ~ privateiy owned. established and? operated with foods through
donation, principei. investment or other means. by any redeem-er.
corporation, association or organization.

132.2 institutionei Character:

a. institutionhesed ~ a laboratory that is iooated within the premises eori

operates as part. of en institution.

of Free-mending - a: laboratory that is not attached to an institution and

ooeretee independently.
1323 Sewtoe Capability:

e. Beotertologicel eoetysie ~ laboratory performs standard methods to detect
and eettmete bacterial coliform organisms in- the water sample.

to. Biological enelyete - laboratory performs standard methods; to detect end
eelimete bio-logic organisms such as plenktone in the water sample.

c. Physical enelyeis - laboratory performs standard methods to measure the
eeethetlo characteristics of the weter eempie.

of. Chemical enelyets ~ laboratory performs standard methods to detect eeo
estimate the chemical eubetenoee in the water sample .

e, Recliologicel analyse laboratory performs standard methods to detect end
eetimete the radioactive contaminants in the water sample.

B. Specific Policies:
M Teena-ice!- Requirements:

l. Physical Fleet

l t the leoolretory shall be housed in a permanent building with eoeeeete weteree

power euooly, drainage and ventilation. it must also be d‘usetree erred meet et
introduce contamination. '

 

1:2 The laboratory workspace shell correlate with the volume and typeot eeelyele t .

tie oneserteken including provisions for periods of peat»: workload. Freestanding ‘
laboratories shell have at a minimum of Menty {20) sq. m workeeece
requirement. ‘

L3 The laboratory workspace shall consist of a sufficient bench: top area for Sample
proceeslng, storage space for chemicals, glassware end supplies and en
etlequete area for Cleaning glassware, sterilizing materials and fixed earl-ct portable
equipment. ‘

1.4 There shell be separation between neighboring areas where activities therein are
at reletecl.

to There shall be adequate physical provisions for the safety of laboratory. oereoehel;

1.6 The laboratory shall have provisions for appropriate solid and tiooio waste -
clteooeel system in accordance with the current DOH Health Care Weete ‘
Menegement Manuel. '

2. Personnel

it The operation of the laboratory shall be under the direction and supervision of e
com-oetertt professional who has management training and et least three (3) years
experience in the theory and practice of procedures used in water testing. The
head of the laboratory shall have the overall responsibility for the orgenieettonel,
professional, educational, administrative and technical activities of the laboratory.

22 The analyst tnvolved in. the performance of laboratory procedures must have the .
appropriate baccalaureate degree and at least two (2) years experience in water
testing procedures relevant to the service capability of the laboratory.

2,3 The laboratory aide must have training or at ieost six (6) months experience on
otericai support and oempting.

3. Equipment, instruments, Reagents; and Suppliee

3.1 The ifeooretory sheii have the necessary equipment, reagents and ooppiies to
perform the teetiog or esootysie and conform with oi! the requirements of the
eoaeiytioei methods recommended or approved by the NRL in eooordanoe with the
current PNSDW and the tetest iocatiy avaiiaoie Standard Method for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water, AWWA, APHA, WPCF,

3.2 The ieooreto‘ry eheii maintain records of each item of eqoiomeot inciuding
maintenance, oeiibrotion and history of damage, meitun—otioo and repair.

ii, Anoiyticei Methods

4.1 The ieboretory shaft eerie-ct: eoeiytioet methods that are appropriate for the eoeiyte
and sempie matrix based on the current PNSDW and the ieteet iooeiiy eveiieziozie
Standard Method for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, AWWA APHA,
WPCF that produce the appropriate quantitative ieveie,

4,12 Modification of esneiytioei methods is etiowed provided that these are ve-iiideted and:
approved by the NRL prior to its use. '

4.3 Approval of the NR1. must be secured by the ieborotoriee before using other
methods of anaiyeie not otherwise specified in the current PNSDW and the ieteei
iooeiiy evteiiebie Standard Method for the Examination of Water and Waste Water,
AWWA, APHA, WPCF.

5. Queiiéty and Teohoioei Meouei

5.1 The ieboretory strait deveioo and maintain a quality menuoi that is appropriate for
the types of analysis done and the voiume of suemoies teetieo. Tire queiity roe-met
shat! inoiode systems, and work instructions for document oorrtroi, eemoio
heooiing and aooeotanoe ooiioies, ethics ooiioy state-meets ergo management
processes and procedures, and the essentiai ouaiity oomtroi end eeeoreooe
requirements for each section of the laboratory,

52 Aii ieboretoriee shall develop ooiicies and systems for preventive and corrective
actions in cases of unforeseen deviation from standard operating procedures,

5.3 The taboratory shall develop and maintain a teohnioai meenoei, which covers the
scope of its requested accreditation. The technical meooei meet ede-ooeteiy
address. method requirements and reﬂect the specific laboratory orooeooree (test
principle, interference, reegentfstendaro preparation, oetibreiioo and quality
controi procedures, date evaiuation and oaicuietioo).

6. Laboratory Reports
6.1 Aii iaboretory reports must clearly state and refiect accurate test results, oemee of
the head of the ieboratory, eneiyst and testing facility.
6.2 The head of the ieooratory and anatyst must affix their eotooi signatures to eti
iaboratory reports prior to issuance.
6.3 Ail taboratory reports bearing electronic signatures of the head of the ioboratory
and arraiyst shati be considered vaiid provided that: the ieooratory tree oreoeriores _

 

in place ta guard against impreper use of the electronic signature and is subject to
the provisions and epnditions of Republic Act No. 8972 knewn as the “Electrenic
Commerce Act at 2880.“

6.4 it epiniena and interpretations are included in the laboratory repent, the reference
must he stated.

65 All iah-eratery reperie :ehali he in the form prescribed by the DOM. .

8.6 The results at euteeurced teats tram another accredited laheratery shall be
attached to the ariginal laheratcry results.

7. Laheratory Rewards

"M The lam-rater}! shalt? maintain recerde in a manner that allewe reeenetraeiien at all
laberatery activities, which includes taberatery requeets, sampling recerds,
analytical reperts and quality central records.

7.2 ~the iaberatery shall else maintain persennel records, equipment maintenance
records, camp-titer pregrams and electronic data. -

7.3 All laberatery records shall he kept and organized fer easy retrieval.

7.4 All lahcratery records shall be retained in the premises for a minimum at five (a)
years.

15 All laboratory recerda shall be disposed after the minimum retentian parted
prescribed by the NRL.

“7.8 All laberatery reeprda shall he held secure and conﬁdential.

7.7 The laheratery shall have a written plan that specifies haw reeerds Witt he
maintained and transferred in the event that the laboratory transfers. eweerehip er
terminates operations.

8. Quality Management

8.1, The laboratory shall prepare and adopt a quality assurance program ta establish,
maintain and improve the quality of data generated by the iaheratery.

8.2 The laboratory shalt analyze quality central samples an each analytical run in
order ta ensure the proficiency at the analyatls and equipment.

8.3 The iaheratery shall canduct an internal quality audit at least every six (6) mentha.

8.4 All quaiity control charts must be displayed in a conspicstieaa piece in the
laboratory.

8.5 All quality central information shall be available in the laheratery.

9. Preficiency Testing '
9.1 All accredited laboratories must participate in proficiency testing eeandueted hy the
NRL and must achieve satisfactory results for continued accreditatieri.

3.2 Certificate of Accreditation:

‘1. The Certificate pf Accreditation shall reflect the parameters applied far in each aeriiice
area.

2. The Certificate of Accreditation is valid for two (2) years and expires en the last day at
December stated therein. Failure is submit an application for renewal at aecreditatien
within sixty (60) days of the expiration date at the current Certificate at Accreditation

Vi.

it!!!w

wit! resort in ieoeo of accreditation and oanceiietion of registration. A new application
for the issuance of aooreditetioo she“ be required before e laboratory can be atioweo
to operate.

The accreditation greeted as weii as; eey right under the accreditation ehaii not be
assigned direotiy or indireoiiy to any party.

The BHFS soon be notified of any change in management name or ownership. in
cases of transfer of iooetion, a new aopiioaiion for accreditation eheii be required.
Failure to report in writing within fifteen (15) days of any eubetarriiei change in the
condition of the ieooratory {erg}. changes in the ohyeioai oient, equipment. or
pereoooei} may be e basis for the suspension or revocation of the accreditation.

A separate accreditation sheir be required for ail iaboretories- or branches maintained
in separate premises but operated under the some management,

The accreditetioo sheii be pieced in an area raadiiy seen by the oubiic. A copy of the
ruiee err-d regoietiorre sheii be readily available for guidance of eii oereoonei of the
reboratory,

PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES:

. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to estabiieh, operate and maintain e

laboratory eheii submit to the BHFSICHD err acoomoiisheo eooiioaiion or: tire
prescribed form and current proficiency test re‘soit (if appiyir‘rg for reoewei}.

The eopiioaoi must pay a nomrefuedabie accreditation fee their is charged for every
aooiioetiorr (irritiai and reoewei) according to the DOH prescribed echeoovi‘e ofieee,
Upon receipt of the eopiroetioo and after payment of the accreditation fee, the
BHFSICHD representative reviews the appiioetion and conducts an moire survey of
the iaooratory to determine oompiiarroe with the steedarde and teoihnioei requirements.
more; or renewei of the Certificate of Accreditation is granted orriy after the BHFSICHD
has determined by survey that the iaboratory has oomoiiee with the aoereoiraiioo
requiremente if the Eeboretory was not rabie to com-pry with the aooreoiraiion
requirements, the BHFSXCHD wouio provide a written report ootiirrirrg tire ias‘boretory’e
deficiencies. The laboratory must respond to the deﬁciency report within thirty (30)
days and correct air deviations within sixty (60) days of receipt of or: site report.

MUNITORtNG:

Authorized representatives from the BHFS/CHD may coed-oer uoeooooooeo, on

site visits of accredited iaboratories to monitor and document the continuing oomoiiience
to set standards,

Vlil. SEPARABIUTYIREPEALING CLAUSE:

in the event that any provision or part of this Order be deofered unauthorized or

rendered invaiid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected
by such decimation sheii remain valid and effective.

 

 

 
 
 
  

has Mes and regsuiaticms svhsai! repeat! and supersede a}! administrative ordarg

anprei gsuances incmsistent warm-f.

19-5 and reguiatians shat: take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after pubﬁcatibn in a
' general circuiati-Qn,

   

 coT a? Titus, m, mm mm
Secretary of Heaﬂh

   

FRAN "

</body>