OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-9502, 711-9503; Telefax: No, (632) 743-1829
Email: osec@doh.gov.ph


<date>11/15/2006</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATlVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006-0035</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: National Policyand Strategic Framework on Male involvement in Reproductive Health</subject>


<body>

l. BACKGROUND ANY}! RATlQNALE

The 1994 International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) and the Beijing Declaration (1995) highlighted the need to involve men in initiatives seeking to improve women’s health, The ICPD Program of Action recommends encouraging and enabling men to take responsibility for their sexual and reproductive behavior and their social and family roles t paragraph 4.27) The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action recognizes equal rights, opportunities and access to resources, equal sharing of responsibilities for the family by men and women, and a harmonious partnership hehrveen them are critical for their well-being and that of their families (section 15). At the national level, male participation has been identified as one of the key elements in its Reproductive Health Policy (DOH, 2000).

Understanding how men behave and how they perceive their role in sexuality and reproduction have important implications for various aspects of reproductive health, which include the timing and characteristics of sexual initiation, contraceptive use, recourse to abortion, prevention and treatment of sexually transmitted infections (STD and HIV/AlDS, gender-based violence, maternal and child health, among others (WHO, 2001}. Moreover, the role of men as primary decision makers and the patriarchal structure which permeate the Philippine society conduced to unequal gender relations in reproductive decisionumaking (NCRFW, 2002). Equally important, is the preponderance of women—centered health services, the influence of gender roles, and cultural expectations which has left the male populace less aware of and knowledgeable of their responsibilities for reproductive health (WHSMP~PC, 2002}.

The interaction of the above-«mentioned attributes together with socio—economic tactors played a major influence in the prevailing health scenario, characterized by: (1) high unmet needs for family planning, with a rate of 17%; (2) large differentials in use of contraception, with male methods {condom and vasectomy) accounting for only 2%; (3) increasing trends in premarital sex among young people (15—24 years old), with an overall level of 23%; {4) high adolescent fertility rate, with an age—specific fertility rate of 55 per 1080 women aged 15—19 years; (5) high abortion rate, with 26 induced abortions per 1000
women of reproductive age, (6) unwanted and unplanned pregnancies, with 80% of young people who had abortions admitted that their aborted pregnancies were unwanted; (7') increased STl prevalence, especially among young men, with a rate of 8% (iii—19 years old); (9) a slow but growing HlV and AlDS cases, 90% of whom were in the 2029 years age group, and 51% were females; (10). increased incidence of prostate cancer, identified as the 4th leading cause of cancerurelated mortality among males; and (1l) increased incidence of gendenpased violence, wherein 6 out of 10 women had experienced some torrn of violence from their partners (NSC), ORG Macro, 2804; Raymondo et al, 2001; NEC~DOH, 2905; UPPl, DRDF, 2004; Philippine Cancer Society, 2004; Guerrero, and Sobritchea, i997). All of these critical areas impact on the well~being and reproductive health status of men, women and children,

Several initiatives were undertaken by non~governrnent and other government agencies, and the academe which involved male participation in the area of STD/HlV/AlDS, domestic violence prevention, and family planning. However, male participation in reproductive health was peripheral (Lee, iQQS’), Hence, there is a need to further enhance these existing individual initiatives and at the same time strengthen collaborative efforts between and among stakeholders to develop a more holistic, integrated and siestainzaoie program on male involvement in reproductive health (MlRH) (Lee, 2000; Clark et at. 2005).

In response, the Department of Health with the support from the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), Manila, convened key stakeholders (is, WHO, CHD~DOH, POPCOM, Social Development CentenDLSU, USAlD, TUC‘P, NCRFW, TriuDev Specialists, OMEN, CARE Foundation, Institute of  Reproductive Health) to a consultative forum in July 2006 to comeup with recommendations on how to tackle the issues and concerns on male involvement in reproductive health as well their sexual and reproductive health needs. Accordingly, said undertaking resolved to establish, among others, a mechanism to support an integrated strategy, evidenceoased programming, behavioral change communication, research, monitoring and evaluation system, and capability~building for MIRH,

Considering that male involvement in reproductive health is critical to the success of the RH programs, with a positive impact on the health and wellheing of women and children, and in line wit‘hthe country‘s commitment to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, it is deemed imperative to systematically respond to this issue as well as address their specific reproductive health concerns such as sexual dysfunctions, androgen deﬁciency, testicular and prostate cancers.

Thus, this National Policy and Strategic Framework on Male involvement in Reproductive Health is hereby formulated. Specifically, it shall set directionas to how MIRH will be "implemented in a comprehensive, systematic and holistic manner, Similarly, this policy shall complement and build upon existing initiatives in the country,

II. DECLARATION OF POLlClES

The policy and strategic framework shall be guided by the following legal mandates:

A. Article V of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women affirmed that maternity is a social function, and recognized the common responsibility of men and women in the upbringing and development of their ohildren.

B. Principle VIII of the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) emphasized the social reeponeihiiity of the memher States to take all appropriate measures. to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women, universet access to heeithaoare services, inoiuoiihg those related to reproductive health care Reproductive healtheoare programs should provide the widest range of eewicee that are gendehreeponeitre rights heeed and culturally accepteble

C. Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action included Women and Health as one of critical areas of concerns that needs to he addressed by government in cooperation with nongovernment organizations, the media, the private sector and relevant international organizations; articulating: that “women have the right to the enjoyment of the highest etiaihaoie staridard of physioei and mental health” reiterating further to“ encourage moo to share equality in ohiiol care and household work and to provide their share of r'irrarroiai support for their famiiies”.

D. Exeohtive Order No. 2?3 approved and adopted the Phiiippioe Plan for Geoderﬂespohsive Development, 19952025 as the national framework for pursuing fuli equality and development for won't-eh and men. it ehail institutionalize Gender and Deveiopmeot (GAD) efforte ih eili- government agencies by incorporating GAD concerns in their planning, programming and budgeting processes.

E. Article 13, Section 11 of the 1987 Phiiippihe Constitution enjoined the State to protect and promote the right to health of every Filipino by making ouaiity and adequate health care available and acceseiibie, eepeoiaiiy the underprivileged. This entaiis the adoption of an integrated and comprehensive approach to health development; lmpiyihg a multieectorel partnership and multi~levei health care delivery system.

F. Administrative Order No. 43 series of 2000 from the Department of Health eetabiiehed the Reproductive Heaith Policy. lmpiementetion of the reproductive health care package shail be integrated into existing services, emphasizing quality and expanding coverage through partnership with local government units, nomgovernment organizations and the private sectors within the framework of the Health Sector Reform Agenda, Moreover, it ehail promote personal responsibility and empower communities to exercise reproductive rights within the framework of the National Ohieotivee for Health.

G. Administrative Order No. 20050023 oi the Department of Health identified Founnula One for Health as the implementing mechanism for health sector reformer thereby ensuring hatter health outcomes. a more responsive public health system, and a more eguitable health care financing for all Filipinoe This invoiveci critical reform initiatives in the rareae of health financing, regulation, service delivery and governance.

III. OBJECTIVES
This Administretive Circler aims to:

A. Provide a strategic framework for male involvement in reproductive health that is anchored on health sector reforms;

B. Emphasize the need to actively and purposiuely involve the male in all aspects of reproductive of health as a way to ehein women s empowerment and gender equality;

C. Provide ooiioy direction for OOH offices, its attached agencies, local government units one other partners in terms of prioritizing activities related to male involvement in reproductive health;

D. Prouicle guidance to partners in the health sector identifying priority areas for support in the context of multi—sectoral coilsboretiohrperthershio to generate and mobilize resources; and

E. Provide guidance to DOH concerned offices and other relevant agencies in facilitating implementation of mole involvement in reproductive heelthservices in the {3011 one at the local government units.

IV. COVERAGE AND SCOPE OF APPLICATION

This issuance covers the DOH at the Central Office, Centers for Health Development, hospitals, medical centers, and other DOHettech-ecl agencies, including local government units and other douclved health services. it shall also include the public and private sectors such as national agencies and local government units, teith~hased organizations, ecodeme, labor sector, media, professional associations, civil society and international development agencies.

Mi‘RH shall encompass all the elements of reproductive health but shall initially focus on the following RH elements that have greater impact on their reproductive health:

1. Maternal and Child Health & Nutrition
2. Adolescent Reproductive Health
3. Family Planning
4. Prevention and Treatment of RTI, including STl/HlVfAlDS
5. Prevention and Management of Abortion and its Complications
6. Violence Against Women and Children
7. Education and Counseling on Sexuality and Sexual Health

V. DEFINITION OF TERMS

A. Empowerment - a process that enables oeoole to identify their own concerns and gain the skills and confidence to act upon them.

B. Enabling Environment - the socioeconomic, cultural and political factors which empower individuals or groups to promote and protect their health.

C. Evidence-Based Medicine - is the conscientious, explieit. and judicious use of current heist evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. The practice of evioehcabaserl medicine means integrating clinical expertise with the best available external clinical evidence from systematic research.

D. Evidence-based Health Care - is a discipline centered upon evidence-based decislohmaliing shrout groups of patients; or populations, which may be manifested as evidenoehased policy—making; purchasing or management.

E. Gender Equity  means fairness and justice in the distribution of hematite and. responsibilities behNeen women and men, and often requires worsens specified projects and programs to and existing inequalities

F. Gender Equality — meahs equal treatment of women and men in laws and politics, and in access to resources and services within families, communities, at the workplace, and society at large.

G. Gender Responsive ~— refers the consistent and systematic attention given to the differences between women and men in society with a View to addressing structural constraints to gender equality;

H. Male involvement in Reproductive Health w refers to men’s shared responsibility and active involvement inresponsihle parenthood, sexual and reproductive behavior including family planning; prenatal, maternal aria child health; prevention of sexually transmitted disease, including HIV; prevention of unplanned and high-risk pregnancies; shared control and contribution to family income; children‘s education, health and nutrition; recognition and promotion of the equal value of children of both sexes.

I. Male Reproductive Health Services -— relate to the reproductive health needs and concerns of Filipino males. The service provisions will initially focus on (t) screening and treatment for Site, including HlVIAlDS; (2) counseling on how to prevent STls and HlWAlDS; (3} giving correct and appropriate information about family planning; (4) providing lentil ly plahning services, eg NFP condoms and vasectomy; (S) couoseling and treatment for infertility; (6) counseling on sexual ty and sexual health as well as counseling and treatment for sexual dysfunction; (8) screening and treatment for testicular, and prostate cancers; (7) screening and treatment of anoropause; and (8) promotion of a healthy lifestyle

J. National Objectives for Health - ls a statement of the national goals for health. It deﬁnes a national strategy for significantly improving the health of r the nation, through the pretrention and control of diseases and the promotion and protection of health.

K. Primary Health Care - is essential health care based on practical, scientifically spend and socially acceptable methods and technology made universally accessiole to individuals and families in the community throUgh their full participation and at a cost that the community and country can afford to maintain every stage of their development in the spirit of seii~reliance and self—determination,

L. Reproductive Healthwv is a state of complete physical mental and social well being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmi ty, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and to its functions and processes.

M. Reproductive Health Care ~ the constellation of methods, techniques and services that contribute to reproductive health and? well-heing. These services include: care of pregnancy and childbirth, plus breastfeeding, nutrition and immunization; family planning; sexuality education; management and prevention of reproductive tract infections, including sexually transmitted infections and HlVlAlDS; and prevention and early detection of infertility and reproductive tract cancers.

N. Reproductive Rights- are the basic rights of all couples and indiv'duals to attain the highest standards of sexual and reproductive health it also includes their right to make decisions concerning reproduction tree of discrimination, coercion and violence, as expressed in human rights documents.

O. Responsible Parenthood - is the will and ability to respond to the needs and aspirations of the family.

P. Sexual Health - is the integration of the physical, emotional, intellectual, and social aspects of sexual being in ways that are positively enriching and that enhance personality, communication and love.

Q. Sexuality - refers to the reproductive system, genderioentity, values or beliefs, emotions, relationships and sexual behavior of people as social beings.

VI. GENERAL GUIDELINES

A. The Department of Health cognizant of the public health signiﬁcance of male involvement in reproductive health and its impact in society shall institutionalize Male involvement in Reproductive Health, guided by the principles of evidencewcas-ed practice, rights-based and gendeoresponsive perspectives, partnership and shared responsibility, and integration. This shall be operationalized by means of policy and legislative enforcements, health sector reforms public information, education and communication research, monitoring and evaluation and multi~sectoral collaboration in comics provision

B. The health program for male involvement in reproductive health shall he in accordance with the thrusts of the Fourrnuia One for Health, National Objectives for Health (2065 (2010}, Medium Term Development Plan of the Department of Health (2092 m 2WD), Millennium Development Goals (2005 £015) and Philippine Plan tor GendersResponsive Development (1995*2025).

C. The Strategy shall initially locus on areas where interventions are possible, effective, and able to be implemented with a clear and actionable role for all sectors. Seven priority elements of reproductive health for immediate action by the health sector will be undertaken. These are (i) maternal and child health and nutrition, (2) adolescent reproductive health, (3) family planning, (4‘) violence against women and children, (.5) prevention and management of abortion and its complications. (6) prevention and treatment of reproductive tract infections, including STl, HlV/AlDS, and (7) education and counseling on sexuality and sexual health.

D. Responsive to the reproductive health needs and concerns of Filipino males, service provisions shall initially focus on {t} screening and treatment for STDs, including HlVfAlDS; (2) counseling Oi’l how to prevent S-Tis arid HlV/AIDS; (3) giving correct and appropriate information shoot family planning; (4) providing family planning services, eg. NFP, condoms, and vasectomy; (5) counseling and treatment for infertility; (a) counseling on sexuality and sexual health, as well as counseling and treatment for sexual dysfunction; (6) screening and treatment for testicular and prostate cancers; (7) screening and treatment of andropaose; and (,8) promotion of a healthy lifestyle.

E. In line with the SSH mission to guarantee equitable, sustainable arid quality Health For All Filipinos, especially the disadvantaged and vulnerable sectors, the Male lhv‘olvemeht in Reproductive Health Strategy shall be based on a primary health care approach with human rights and gender dimensions that addresses the range of factors (is. gendeointloenced socioeconomic and cultural factors) that determine the reproductive health and well—being of men, women and children.

F. Consistent with the systems and principles of the lCPD on reproductive health, the approach concerns itself with equitable access to quality health care at all levels, community participation and maximum community self reliance, use of socially acceptable. scientific. and affordaole technology, and lnter~sectoral collaboration. Accordingly, the most effective interventions can be delivered through health centers and similar facilities, and through outreach, which are collectively described as “close to client’ systems (Commission on Macroeconomics and Health).

G. Mainstreaming the reproductive health paradigm in the primary health care (PHC) system facilitates the implementation of the RH programs and initiatives, with male involvement in particular, leading to the attainment of its goals and objectives. Such a repositioning goes beyond reaffirming commitments to established principles and values, such as community participation and inter—sectoral collaboration. This would change what was done and how things were done within PHC, explicitly being more responsive to the issues {if human rights, gender equity and eeciai justice. Cerresechdingiy, redefining :recrccieciive iiiwheaith as a ‘ecciai injustice rather than as a ‘heaitzh dieadventege’ provides the Iegai and petiticai basis for gcvernments t0 ensure reprc‘ductive health care for aii men, women and chiidreri.

H. Ccnsidering the iundementei rcie men piay in summing wcmeh’e reproductive heeith and in treneterming the sociai roles that constrains repreduc‘rive heeith and rights. a gendeerespensive perspective she?! be an integrei part at the Male inveivement in Reproductive Heeith Strategy. Equeliy important, inciusien at a righteheeed dimension ensures the reelizatien 0i fundamentai human rights anti freedeme, and puts the peer, mergineiized and winerehie sectors at the core of this Pciicy and the feces cf the MiRH Strategy.

I. Rié‘hts and gender—responsive perspectives recegnize gender eeuaiity, equity, and ricer—discrimination not eniy es inetrumentai tc heeith and deveIOpment, but also as ends in themselves.

VII. STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK

A. Visicn:

invoived, weiininfcrmect genderwsensitiire Filipino meie aciiveiy participating and premeting repmducz‘ive heaith rewards reeponsibte pererrthccd.

B. Mission:

To ensure availability of and access to comprehensive, quaiity, aperepriate, gender—responsive and rights—based reprcductive hearth care iinfermaiien and services in err enacting envircnmem‘ through enhanced capacities of and partnership with key steirehciders. '

C. Goal:

Enheeced active invcivement cf the Fiiipino maie in repreductive heeh‘h, centributing to the achievement of the neiiene! objectives fer bee-1th end gender equality,

D. Program Objectives:

Tc estabiiSh end/or strengthen structures, mechanisms and systems for active male involvement in RH.

The speciﬁc program objectives shat! conform to the foiiewing. Fowmuzlie One for Health components:

1. Governance:

a. To establish a coordinating mechanism for the Sharing and ccmergehce of MIRH efforts, reeeurces and best practices by end of 2008.

b. To develop etehderde and guidelines on Male involvement in Reproductive Health (MlRH) by mid 2007.

c. To develop a technical eeeietertce package for national agencies, local government units, private sector and N603 relating to MlRH polioiee and programs by end of 200?.

d. To establish and implement an MlRH research, monitoring and evaluation system by 2007.

2. Health Care Financing:

a. To allocate special funds and resources for the implementation of the MlRH Program by the Department of Health, other national agencies and the local government units starting 2007.

b. To mobilize resources for MlRi—i from private sectors end partners starting 2006.

c. To facilitate the expansion of the Philippine Health insure-hoe and Health Maintenance Organization benefit packages for MiRH by 200?.

3. Health Regulation:

a. To upgrade health facilities providing meleiafriehclly Services in eooordehce with Sentrorrg Sigle and Philheelth standards.

4. Service Delivery:

a. To integrate MlRl-l services into the existing RH programs in {SIGH—retained hospitals, LGU health facilities, N603 and other etekeholsciem by 2010. '

b. To increase the number of DOH~reteihed hospitals and USU health facilities capable of providing MlRH services by 10% every year.

c. To improve the competencies of health service providers from 00H» retained hospitals/medical centers and in F1~5LGU health facilities on MlRH by 2010.

d. To improve availability and access to male wtriehclly MiRH information and services in all intervention settings by 10% every year.

e. To increase the number of Filipino melee aware of their roles and needs on reproductive health by 50% in year 201-0.

f. To improve the health-seeking behavior of Filipino males by 30% in year 2010.

g. To increase the number of males who are supportive of women’s concerns, choices and decisions on their reproductive health by 50% in yearZOiO.

E. GUlDiNG P'RlNClPLE-S

The Male involvement in Reproductive Health Strategy shall be guided by the following principles:

l. Evidence-Based Practice

Evidencebased practices can be positioned along a continuum from qualitative to quantitative evidence. Examples ranging from qualitative to quantitative include: opinion based on community experience or cultural knowledge, to descriptive studies, surveys, cohort studies, no-n~randomized trials, and finally, randomised control trials. Decisiommaking regarding interventions are to be based on a systematic appraisal of the best evidence available in the context of the prevailing values and resource available.

To prevent the continued waste of valuable resources on practices that may not be effective, practitioners, researchers and policymakers need to work closely to develop and implement a national research agenda that supports the Strategy.

_ Research has shown that MiRH strategies that include mass media campaigns, individual and group counseling, skills~based interventions (including decisionmaking skills and partner communication), and interventions which reach men in their own communities are effective on male involvement in STis, family planning, and sale motherhood.

2i Partnership and Shared Responsibility

A partnership is a voluntary agreement between two or more parties to work cooperatively toward a set of shared outcomes in MIRH. Partnerships may form part oi a multisectoral collaboration for Male involvement in Reproductive Health, or be based on alliances for specific RH issues. Partnershipsmay include the public sector, the non~government organizations and the private sector. They may also involve different levels of jurisdiction leg. municipal, city, provincial, regional, national and international levels),

The principle of shared responsibility recognizes that male involvement is not lost the responsibility of individuals. Creating conditions conducive to MIRH is the responsibility of all sectors (eg. health, education, lab-or, military, and others) and is affected by governments at all levels, the private sector, the none government organizations, families, schools. workplaces and communities.

Partnership is an important mechanism for putting the idea of integration into practice. Effective partnerships have the potential to add value to work that is already being done to address issues in MIRH,

3. integration

Considerable work is already being done to address speciﬁc MlRH issues (so. ‘Truclrer’s Project, Men’s Movement in Support of Women and it) Development, ‘Assessmeht of Men‘s linvoivement in Family Planning, ‘Access or Vulnerable Workers to RH Services, NSV campaigns, ‘ERPAT? by community groups, governments, insomgoverhmerit and taith~oased organizations and the private sector, inciuding media.

integration will ice as major focus of the Strategy. it means working to a more coordinated way to address specific issues together, as much as possible. Service packages for MlRi—l in the health care delivery system can be sustained by means of an integrated, functionei and motoailyeoooortive referral system between poetic and private service providers, leading to a progressive improvement of comprehensive health care for men, women and children.

F. STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS

Thexstrategic directions have been set: for a fiveayear period from 2006 so to 2010. To establish ahdlor strengthen structures, mechanisms and systems for active male involvement to reproductive health is the principai ooiective of the Male involvement in Reproductive Health Strategy.

Based on the four (4) reform areas under Foonnoia One for Health, the following components shall he adopted:

1%. Governance: to improve the iocai health system governance and coordination, enhance public—private partnership, and improving central capacities to manage the health sect-or.

2. Health Regulation: to assure access to duality and affordable heatth products, devices, facilities and services, especially those utilized by the marginalized and disadvantaged sectors.

3. Health Service Delivery: to improve accessibility and availahiiity of basic and essential health care for all, especially the marginalized and disadvantaged sectors.

4. Health Care Financing: to increase and secure better and sustained investments in health, thus, improve the health outcome, especially the marginalized and disadvantages sectors.

Vill. PROGRAM COMPONENTS

in accordance with the Reproductive Health Policy of the Deoartmeot of Health, the following program components for Male Invoivemeot in Reproductive Health shall be developed.

A. Health Promotion

This component shall include advocacy, information, education and communication activities addressed to policy makers, other government and nonwgoveroment agencies, private sectors including media, the general public and other stakeholders concerning the effects of sociocultural constructs of masculinity, gender relations, sexual and reproductive healthwriek behaviors on the health of men, women one children. Thus, evoke to positive sociopolitical response, changes in the public perceptions and male perepectivee in
reproductive health.

B. Human Resource Development and Management

This component shall focus on enhancing the capability of health and nor:~ health service providers at all levels in male involvement in reproductive health. . it shall include clevelooihg mechanisms to guarantee availability and accessibility of accredited training institutione and service providers adept in rendering comprehensive MiRH service interventions for each key settings, which they include, but not limited to the community, schools, homes, and workplaces.

C. hietworking and Linkages

This component shall establish moltieectorol collaboration and partnerships with MlRH stakeholders at the national, regional and local levels. it shall take into acooont the mandates and activities of the various stakeholders involved in reproductive health, and forge agreements and commitments in the following areas, but not limited to advocacy and awareness campaigns, research, information exchange, service provision and referrals, resource sharing, anal regulatory enforcements.

D. Equitable Health Financing Package

In coordination with the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Pl—llC), this component shell formulate PHlCa-heneiit peeks-ages for male reproductive. heeith services. Other benefit packages shall be addressed through existing Health Maintenance Organization programs for clients in the private sector in coneonance with the guidelines developed by the Department of Health.

E. Research and Development

This component shall establish a research agenda to build knowledge and evidences, and gain a better understanding of mole involvement in RH and the determinants of reproductive health. Thus, appropriate responses can be developed and evaluated. it shall include, but not limited to male sexual and reproductive health perepeCtives, behavior and practices, its consequences and impact of interventions,

F. Service Delivery

This component shall establish a comprehensive and integrated package of service provisions in all levels of the health care delivery system, with emphasis on reproductive health promotion and primary prevention. if necessary, prose sectoral intervention management shall be instituted through appropriate referral and networking mechanisms. The principle of evioe-nceﬁpaeeo practice shall be appiied to ail interventions to ensure duality care and cost—effectiveness.

G. Monitoring and Evlaiuation

This component: shaii identify key indicators for the evaluation of program effects, which inciude, process (strategy detectives), impact (program objectives) and outcome (program goats) for each of the seven priority areas. The respite of the evaidations shalt be osed in revising or formoiating policies, goideiines. strategies and program pians for mate invoivement in reproductive health.

IX. IMPLEMENTiNG MECHANISMS

A. Qrganizationai Structure

Based on the strategic activities, organizationei structures shat! be

established, with deiineation of rote-s and responsihiiities, and identification of
areas of coordination and coliaooration among ail MiRi-l stakeholders.

‘1.

National Structure

Nationei Aiiiance for Male involvement in Reproductive Hearth (NAMiRH)

shall be created by virtue of an Administrative Order; designating the
Department of Heaith, represented by the Undersecretary of Heaith .. Poticy
and Standards Development Team for Service Delivery, and the Commission
on Popuietion (POPCOM), represented by the Executive Director as oo-
chairs, The NAMiiRi-l meetings shall he atternately convened and presided by
both agencies. Composed of core staff from both agencies, other government
and nongovernment agencies, protessionai societies! academia, other poetic
and private sectors, it shalt be responsible for deveiopihg and impi-ementing a
national action plan for male involvement in reproductive heeith.

a.

Subcommittees shalt be organized corresponding to the seven priority
areas as necessary According to specific areas of invoivementi the and
committees shail comprise sector representatives and DQH program
managers. in coordination with the regional and iocai impiementing
committees, it shalt he responsible for program monitoring and eveioation
based on their.,respective priority areas, and provide recommendations to
the NAMIRH.

There shail be a Secretariat composed of NCDPC and POPCQM staff. it is
responsible for coordinating the meetings. preparation of agenda, and
documenting the minutes of the meeting, and shot! come from the agency,
alternateiy convening the NAMiRH meetings,

Regionai Structures

Program strategies and activities undertaken at the regionai ievei shaii he

managed by the Regional Aliiance for Male involvement in Reproductive

"1

is

Health (RAMlRi-l) or by existing committees that can absorb this function. The:
composition and organizational arrangements shall correspond to the
NAMIRH. For NAMiRH without regional? counterparts, other stakeholders shall
he encouraged to be involved.

3. Provincial and Local Structures

Program implementation shall be carried out at the provincial, city,
municipal and harsh-gay levels, The composition and organizational
arrangements shall relate to the RAMIRH. Each corresponding level shall be
under the leadership of the local chief executive. For RAMlRH without local
counterparts, other stakeholders shall be encouraged to be involved.

B. Roles and Responsibilities
1 Department of Health

The Department of Health as the lead agency shall continuously raise
awareness among its partners in the government, private sectors, end faith-
based institutions, advocate for and create political commitments, and settle
a moth—sectoral mechanism on male involvement in reproductive health.

The Department of Health, representing the health sector, has the primary
responsibility of providing national standards of quality health care, health
promotion and health protection on the Male involvement in Reproductive
Health Program, from which local government units, noon-government
organizations, other private organizations and individual members of society
will anchor their Ml‘RH~related programs and strategies.

2. Local Government Units (LGUs)

The LGUs should be able to translate the national policy on male
involvement reproductive health into local policies or ordinances for
implementation. The LGUs shall facilitate the allocation of funds and generate
resources from its various partners in the field. They shall harness the
participation of other government and non—government agencies, families,
communities and other stakeholders for a unified action towards male
involvement in reproductive health. '

3. Other government agencies, non—government agencies, private sector;
feith~besed organizations, civil society, international develooment
agencies and other partners.

The broad range of critical issues and solutions to male involvement in
reproductive health encompass stakeholders from various sectors. Each
potential stoke-holder shall share their capabilities and resources, orienting e
moltieectorei acticn~oriented effort with no competition and conflict of
interest, The problem of’male involvement in reproductive health cannot be
solved by a single agency on its own,

14

C. Funding

The Departmsm sf H-ssith and Centers fer Heaith Devsispment shsii
preside funds fer technicai assistance, manitsring and advocacy campaigns.
{Ether nations! gsvsmmsnt and ssnwgsvsmms-nt agencies, {seal government
units and ether stakshsfdsrs shsil cs-ntribut‘s csuntsrpart funds is ensure and
susts§n the impismsntatisn of the Mats invoivement in Reproductive Haslth
Program.

X. REPEAUNG CLAUSE
The prsvésiens of previsus Ordersand other related issuances in‘csnsistsm
sr centrary with the provisisns of this Administrative Order are hereby revised,

modified, repealed or rescinded accerdingiy. AH other provisisns 0f existing
issuancss which are not affected by this Order shall remain vsﬁd and m effect.

XL EFFECTWITY

This Order shsii take effect immediately.

  
 
   

j]! T. Mus :42, EM), 3213::

scretary of Hsaith

  

FRAN

STRATEGKI FRAMEWGRK

Figure 1. Key Elements cf Mal-s lmolvsmem in Rspmdsctlse Health Strategy

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VlSlGlll
i Involved. l-veifnlrgflmlzed, gsrzaferl‘~slslxsllive Fiiépim male actively mrlicipming
3’ and prﬂmméng mpmdllcrive Mali}: rewards responsible parsnihoocl’.
m ’ ' ' ' l
W MlSSlON
ll Ts erasure? availabilﬁ’y Qfﬂﬁd access is compreshsm'ivs, quai’ilfy,
l3! appraprim‘s. gsndwurssplmslvs and rights-5ssesl rszpmducllve lzsafliz
[3 cars ilzjbrmaliml and services in cm Enabling ensirwzmsm ﬂirting}:
........ ashamed capzwélies qfcmd parmwslllp with key siczkslmldsrs.
3 KEY
GGAL SETTING-Si
3- Enhanced active imlslvemem (if the Filipirm male in ‘ _
reaproduclive smirk, canzribmmﬁ m the achievement if!“ {his llslfﬁsllrsmlly
mlimml’ akiscﬁvesfm seam: and gender sqzlcziigs. nggggg
E W Cmssurzlty
oslscnvs ”ﬂing?
To aestcréalish and .x’asr .S'lrmgthsn structures. mschanisms Euslﬂess and
and systemsfm' acme male invalvemem in lndsslrf
maroduclive inc-ism: Gsvemmeﬁts
I Falllivhsssd
W lsslilulislls
ill . PRIMARY HEALTH CARE APPROACH. ,
3y . with a rightsebassd and gendsr~responslve dimsnslen 7 7 , 7
Cl} ,7 , , , , ‘l’srget l’spulstloa
ww- Flllplm male 5;
' {yessglallullleldstly} {f ,.
Evidence-Eases ‘ Parlnslslilp and integration
ls Pracllss Shares} Rssponsiblllly lserlicsl 8: hsrlzcmlsl)
m l l l l
l
Govemsnce Health Health 39:1;le Hsalll'icars
Regulaiicm Delivsry Finsnclnglﬁsssums
Msbllizslicrl
MALE INVOLVEMENT in: MALE REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVlCES:
mm Malsmal and Child Health and Nutrition; ' Screening ll, treatment fur STls, and lllVlAlDS:
Adslsscenl Reproductive Health Counseling on MW in plsvsnl STls and lll‘v’lAlDS;
, Family Planning; Family Planning caunssllng;
Eli“ Educatlsn and Counseling an Sexuality Pravidiﬁg carilracsplivs msthsds. (candsms 3: vasectomy);
and Sexual Health; Counseling and tre‘islmsnl ml lnlsrliilly;
Prevention and Mansgsmsnl cl Counseling and treatment lsr sexual dysluscllsn;
Abortion and its Gampllcallcns; Screaming and treatment fill” testicular 8. plasma cancers;
STl including HlWAllllS; and Screening and treatment far andropauss.
. Vlslence Asslnsl Wsmsn and Children: Pramstian of Health»: Llisslvls

 

 

 

 

 

 

16

</body>