Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. No. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-95-02, 711-95-03; Telefax No. (632) 743-18-29

   
<date>04/28/2006</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006-0007</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in Establishing Governing Boards for Augmenting Management Capacity of Public Hospitals</subject>


<body>

I. RATIONALE:

During the last three years, all DOH hospitals and some local public hospitals were allowed full income retention and utilization as initial steps towards ﬁscal autonomy. The use of hospital income had signiﬁcantly contributed to a more responsive delivery of quality health services, since it is readily available for their day-to-day operations and priority projects for hospital infrastructure development and e quipment p urchase. In parallel with these activities on hospital ﬁscal reform, correlated activities are continuously done to ensure that the DOH policy on social responsibility for indigents and safeguarding patient’s rights are being enforced.

This effective and efﬁcient utilization of hospital ﬁnancial resources has provided hospitals some managerial ﬂexibility. To ﬁirther enhance management capacity towards managerial autonomy additional support mechanism need to be established.

Hospital Governance is one of the critical components to hospital organization and management. The creation of a Governing Board is intended to improve the management and implementation of major hospital refOrms geared towards improving quality, efﬁciency and effectiveness of healthcare delivery services. The Governing Board Shall assume the responsibility of charting the public health facility towards its avowed mission and objectives. In essence, the Governing Board reﬂects an augmented managerial capacity and autonomy, for providing general direction and guidance in the management and operation of the hospital.

The establishment of a Governing Board should be able to strengthen the responsiveness of the hospital and the community it serves. The hospital Governing Board functions as the link between the health facility and its clientele in order for the health facility to be more responsive to its clientele’s health needs. The creation of a hospital governing board also represents the shift in public hospital management system, from an exclusively government function to a participative approach. The community, through its representatives in the board, takes an active role in hospital management. Health programs and services needed by the community are expressed and translated by the board into policies and procedures. In the same vein, community representatives in the Governing Board can explain hospital policies and procedures better to the general public. The structure and composition of the Governing Board and the policies and procedures it follows to ensure the orderly conduct of its business are critical in fulﬁlling the hospital’s mission and goals to serve the community.

II. OBJECTIVES:

A. GENERAL OBJECTIVE:

This Order aims to institute reforms in the management of public hospitals to allow them to improve responsiveness, quality and efﬁciency in the delivery of quality health care services.

B. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:

Establishment of Governing Boards in Government Hospitals aims to: 

1) Increase managerial capacity and autonomy that will ensure efﬁcient and effective delivery of hospital care services
2) Strengthen social commitment and ensure full protection of the healthcare requirements of the indi gents; and
3) Establish proper accountability over hospital performance

III. SCOPE:

This Administrative Order shall provide guidelines for the development of managerial autonomy for all public hospitals. In particular, guidelines are embodied in this Order for the establishment of Governing Boards in Government hospitals.

IV. GENERAL POLICIES & PRINCIPLES

A. The FOURmula ONE for Health is developed to implement critical reform initiatives into four components namely: Financing, Regulation, Service Delivery, and Governance. In the area of good governance, the main aim is to strengthen government leadership in implementing a sector program where development partners cooperate and contribute accordingly.

B. Governing Boards for public hospitals can strengthen government leadership and management through participation of partnersand clients in the sector

C. DOH Corporate hospitals operate with its own separate charters signed by the President of the Philippines. The charters provide for its corporate structure and for a Board of Trustees that has management authority over the operation'Of these hospitals. Local government corporate restructuring of hospitals, or economic enterprises are mandated by provincial or city ordinances signed by the local chief executive.

D. Governing Boards for non-corporate DOH hospitals and for local public hospitals can also be established to improve management capacities and responsiveness to client expectations.

E. Governing Boards may be established for an individual hospital or for a cluster or network of hospitals within a contiguous geographical location. Hospitals within functional interlocal health zones (ILHZ) may also establish one governing board for the core referral hospital, Satellite hospitals, and primary care units in the ILHZ.

F. In cases where the establishment of a Governing Board may not be feasible, the local government unit may opt to create an Advisory Council that in time can evolve into a formal Governing Board.

The Governing Boards established for non corporate DOH hospitals shall not be used to register the hospital with the Securities & Exchange Commission as a separate juridical entity.

V. POWERS, COMPOSITION, AND FUNCTIONS OF THE GOVERNING BOARD

A. Powers and Accountabilities of the Governing Board.

The Governing Board, shall have general charge of the properties, business, affairs and transactions of the Hospital with the power. to manage, direct and supervise the same under its collective responsibility as provided in the Guiding Rules for Hospital Governing Board (sample template in Annex A) or conferred upon it by applicable laws and regulations.

The Hospital Governing Board has an enormous responsibility bestowed upon its shoulders by the community and the government. The members hold ﬁduciary position that requires them to discharge their duties in good faith and with diligence, care and skill within the scope of their authority. The Governing Board, individually and collectively, is personally liable for any wrongful disposition of hospital assets and for any loss or injury to the hospital arising from their gross negligence or unauthorized acts or violation of their duties. The members of the Board, however, are not liable for business losses incurred because of honest bad judgment. As such, the Board must at all times ensure that its decisions are to the best interest of the community, particularly the poor, and the hospital.

B. Composition.

The affairs and business of the hospital shall be directed, its properties managed, and its administrative powers exercised, by its own Governing Board which may be composed of seven (7) members, as follows:

l. Ex-Ofﬁcio Members:

a. Secretary of Health as Chairman of the Board or his Undersecretary or his duly authorized representative
b. The Hospital Director or Chief of Hospital as Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and Vice Chairman of the Board
c. Secretary of Budget and Management or his duly authorized representative
d. The Regional Director of the Center for Health DeVelopment representing the Region or province or his duly authorized representative

2. Appointive Members: Three (3) representatives from the business sector and socio-civic sector including medical and professional organizations

Appointments shall be made by the Secretary of Health for the ﬁrst or initial appointees, and then by the Governing Board for subsequent appointees. The appointive members of the Governing Board" shall Serve for a term of three (3) years and may be reappointed for one renewal term; while the ex-ofﬁcio member shall serve as members for the duration of their incumbency as such.

The Governing Board shall formulate Guiding Rules for H ospital G overning B cards (sample template in Annex A), which shall contain, among others, an enumeration of each of the member’s responsibilities, accountabilitiesand cause of termination.

C. Selection of Appointive Members to the Governing Board:

1) Process of Selection

A Selection Committee organized by the Chairman of the Governing Board shall organize the ﬁrst batch of members to the hospital Governing Board. The immediate task of the-Selection Committee is to formulate the selection criteria for board members.

The selection process for the ﬁrst batch of members to the Governing Board shall be as follows.

a. The Selection Committee shall screen nominees from the list of qualiﬁed individuals submitted by the Center for Health Development and by Hospital Directors, who are prominent individuals, preferably residing within the catchment area particularly medical practitioners in the community, ﬁnancial experts or health economists, members of professional & socio-civic organizations, representatives from the religious community, etc.

b. The Selection Committee shall submit a show-list of qualiﬁed persons for board membership to the Secretary of Health for review.

c. The Secretary of Health shall appoint the board members. To ensure that there 13 continuity of governance, one member will be appointed for a term of three (3) years with the second member for a term of two (2) years and the third member for a term of one (1) year only.

2) Considerations, Qualiﬁcations and Criteria for Selection

a. The search committee should limit its choices to persons who have the right knowledge, skills and experience as well as the time and inclination to serve the hospital.

b. Integrity, intelligence, interest, proven decisiveness and dedication shall be given weight in the selection process.

c. Members of the Board should be able to address the realities of the issues facing the organization and the types of expertise required to address them.

d. Potential members of the Governing Board should preferably have a variety of expertise; Among the required expertise area in every board are: (hospital) ﬁnance and administration, business management and marketing. A client representative from religious groups, people’s organizations or socio-civic organizations, must also be included as a member. Other expertise area which may be included in the board membership are public health care, government rules and regulations, legal expertise, or other such expertise required in the hospital.

e. The members of the Board should preferably be residents Of the locality where the government hospital is located and should have at least ﬁve (5) years experience in his/her ﬁeld of expertise.

D. Functions of the Governing Board.

The Governing Board Shall perform the following functions:

1) POLICY FORMULATION.

a. Determine the general operating policies of the hospital within the scope of its powers, objectives and ﬁnancial resources, and within the general policies, thrusts and goals of the DOH and the Government of the Philippines.

2) DECISION MAKING:

a. Decide over strategic development thrusts and ﬁnancial transactions including fund management, subject to levels of authority to be speciﬁed in the hospital by—laws.

3) DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:

a. Recommend appointment of the Chief of Hospital who shall be the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer and authorize the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of the hospital to approve the appointments of all other hospital personnel. Provided that the appointments approved by the Chief of Hospital (or Chief Executive Ofﬁcer) shall give due consideration to the qualiﬁcation standards set by the Civil Service Commission for the position. Provided further, that all appointments approved by the Chief of Hospital, in his capacity as Chief Executive Ofﬁcer, shall be on the basis of merit and ﬁtness and all personnel actions shall be in pursuance of Civil Service Laws, rules and regulations.

b. Create an Executive Committee composed of not less than three members of the Governing Board-with the following basic functions:
i. To act on speciﬁc matters as may be delegated to it by the Governing Board; and
ii. To expedite action on important matters without the need for a board meeting especially when such cannot readily be held.

c. C reate s uch o ther c ommittees w hich the Governing B card d eems n ecessary to efﬁciently and effectively manage the affairs of the hospital.

4) OVERSIGHT:

a. Review and approve the annual and supplemental budgets as well as the Strategic Development Plan of the Hospital: Provided that annual and supplemental budgets of the Hospital requiring government subsidy and fund releases shall be reviewed and endorsed by the Governing Board and submitted to the Department of Budget & Management for appropriate action and ﬁnal approval;

b. Monitor the implementation of the hospital’s general policies, plans and projects and ﬁnancial performance as it relates to the Hospital’s service delivery performance;

c. Submit an annual report on the operation of the hospital to the Field Implementation Coordination Ofﬁces cc: National Center for Health Facility Development (N CHFD); and

d. Such other monitoring and evaluation activities to determine operational and ﬁnancial performance of the hospital. Such activities should include, but not limited to, the following:

i. Review the progress of implementation per Operating Budgets and Strategic. Plans against actual accomplishments; and
ii. Review monthly Financial Report together with the Hospital Operational Report
iii. Submit required monitoring and evaluation reports of hospital performance to DOH and other relevant agencies.

e. Evaluate the annual performance of the Chief of Hospital and provide for appropriate mechanisms to reinforce excellence thereof.

f. The Commission on Audit shall continue to be the external auditor for the Hospital.

VI. IMPLEMENTATION PHASE

A. The guidelines for organizing the Selection Committee for Governing Boards of National public hospitals for Luzon and Visayas-Mindanao shall be deﬁned by the DOH, through the NCHFD.

B. Incentives and b enchmarks to ensure apprOpriate e stablishment o f Governing Boards for all non corporate public hospitals shall be set by the DOH.

C. FICO in coordination with NCHFD will also determine the need to create a Governing Board for either an individual hospital or a Governing Board for a cluster of hospitals by geographical location.

VII. REPEALING CLAUSE

All laws, acts, executive orders, administrative orders, rules or regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modiﬁed accordingly.

VIII. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE

In the event that any provision or part of this Order be declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective.

IX. EFFECTIVITY

This order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

ANNEX A
Sample only. For modiﬁcation per hospital, as needed

GUIDING RULES FOR HOSPITAL GOVERNING BOARD
(Speciﬁes the detailed guidelines in the conduct of business of the Governing Board)

I. MEETINGS OF THE GOVERNING BOARD

A. Regular Meetings

The regular meetings of the Governing Board, for the purpose of electing the appointive members and for the transaction of the business as may properly come before the meeting shall be held once every month/quarter of the year on such dates and at such times as the Chairman of the Governing Board, or in his absence, the Chief of Hospital.

B. Special Meeting

The special meetings of the GOVeming Board, for any purpose or purposes, may at any time be called by any of the member of the Governing Board or by the Chief of Hospital

C. Place of Meeting

All regular and special meetings shall be held at the principal ofﬁce of the Hospital or at any place designated by the Governing Board in the city or municipality where the Hospital is located.

D. Notice of Meeting

The Secretary may send Notices for regular or special meetings of the Governing Board by personal delivery, telephone or by mail at least one (1) week prior to the date of the meeting to each of the member. The Notice shall indicate the place, date, time and agenda of the meeting.

E. Quorum

In all regular and special meetings, a majority of the members present or represented shall constitute a quorum. If no quorum is constituted, the meeting shall be adjourned.

F. Conduct of the Meeting

The meetings shall be presided over by the Chairman of the Governing Board, or in his absence, the Vice—Chairman, or if none of the foregoing is present and acting, by a member to be unanimously chosen by the attendees to the meeting. If the Secretary is not present in the meeting, the Chairman of the meeting shall appoint a secretary for that particular meeting. Minutes of the meeting have to be taken by the Director of the Hospital (or a designated staff), and have to be approved and endorsed by the Board in their subsequent meeting.

II. GOVERNING BOARD

A. Powers and Authorities

Unless otherwise provided by law, the Governing Board shall have the following express powers:

1. To approve the general policies of the Hospital

2. To approve in any lanlll manner, for and In the name of the Hospital, all transactions of the Hospital which are reasonably and necessarily required for such consideration and upon such terms and conditions as the Board may deem proper or convenient.

3. To manage the funds of the Hospital in the manner that will serve the best interest of the Hospital.

4. To delegate, from time to time, any of the powers of the Board which may be lawfully delegated in the course of the current business of the Hospital to any standing or special committee or to any ofﬁcer as it may be deemed ﬁt.

5. To set the limitations and restrictions to such authorities vested or delegated to any standing or special committee or to any ofﬁcer, including the Hospital Director, in accordance with the laws and these by—laws.

B. Vacancies

If any position in the Governing Board becomes vacant by reason of death, resignation, disqualiﬁcation or for any other cause, the Governing Board, by majority, may elect a successor. A member so elected to ﬁll a vacancy shall be elected only for the unexpired term of the predecessor in ofﬁce.

C. Compensation

By resolution of the Governing Board, each member shall receive a reasonable per diem allowance for his attendance at each meeting of the G0verning Board. As compensation, the Governing Board shall determine said amount and the Chief of Hospital shall ensure that said amounts are included the annual budget of the Hospital. A member shall not be precluded from serving the Hospital in any other capacity as an ofﬁcer, agent or otherwise and receiving compensation therefore, subject to prescribed government rules and regulations.

D. Conﬂict of Interest

The Conﬂict of Interest policy is a key to the proper functioning of and maintenance of public conﬁdence that every public ofﬁcer perform his or her own duties with utmost honesty and unquestionable integrity. In particular,

1. A member of the Board must not engage in any activity that could result in an aetual, potential or perceived conﬂict of interest.

2. Any transaction by a member of the Board that also involves a member of his or her family or a close personal relationship must be brought to the attention of - the Board to ensure that appropriate steps are taken that the Board member retains no inﬂuence or input concerning the transaction.

3. A Board member must never accept compensation in any form from any individual or organization for directing the Hospital’s business to that individual or organization or for accepting business on behalf of the Hospital.

4. A m ember must not enter into b usiness relationship with suppliers of the Hospital except for the normal consumer transactions conducted through the ordinary retail sources.

5. During the course of his or her tenure as member of the Governing Board, the membermay be exposed to privileged information. The member must not permit such knowledge or information to be used by or discussed with other individuals or organizations to the detriment of the Hospital, unless required by the courts of law. This policy is intended to prevent the inadvertent disclosure of conﬁdential information to persons outside of the Hospital and to ensure Compliance with law or
regulation.

III. OFFICERS

A. Chairman of the Governing Board

The Chairman of the Governing Board shall preside at the meetings of the Governing Board. He shall also exercise such powers and perform such duties asthe Governing Board may assign to him. The Vice Chairman will preside at the meetings of the Governing Board in the absence of the Chairman;

B. Chief of Hospital (designated as the Vice-Chairman)

The Chief of Hospital shall be the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of the Hospital and shall have take charge of the administration and direction of the daily business affairs of the Hospital. He shall exercise the following functions:

1. To preside at the meetings of the Governing Board in the absence of the Chairman;

2. To initiate and develop 0 orporate objectives and p olicies and formulate long range projects, plans and programs for the approval for the Governing Board, including those for executive training, development and compensation;

3. To have general supervision and management of the business affairs and properties of the Hospital;

4. To ensure that the administrative and operational policies of the Hospital are carried out under his supervision and control;

5. Subject to guideline prescribed by law, to appoint, remove, suspend or discipline employees of the Hospital, prescribe their duties and determine their Salaries;

6. To oversee the preparation of the annual budget and the ﬁnancial reports of the Hospital and accordingly report these to the Governing Board for approval;

7. To execute on behalf of the Hospital all contracts, agreement and other instruments affecting the interests of the Hospital which require the approval for the Governing Board, except-as otherwise directed by the Governing Board; and

8. To perform such other duties as are incident to his ofﬁce or are entrusted to him by the Governing Board.

9. The Chief of Hospital may assign the exercise or performance of any of the foregoing powers, duties and ﬁmctions to any other ofﬁcials subject always to his supervision and control.

C. Secretary

The Secretary shall be the custodian . of and shall maintain the record of the Hospital’s formal actions and transactions. He shall have the following speciﬁc powers and duties:

1. To record or see to the proper recording of the minutes and transaction of all meetings of the Governing Board to be maintained in the form and manner required by law;

2. To keep the Hospital Seal and afﬁx it to all papers and documents requiring such seal;

3. To attend to the giving and serving of all Notices of the Hospital as required by law;

4. To certify to such corporate acts, countersign corporate documents or resolutions, and make reports or statements as may be required of him by law or by government rules and regulations;

5. To act as inspector of the Governing Board and as such to determine the existence of a quorum and attest to the validity and effect of the proxies or representative sent; and

6. To perform such other duties as are incident to his ofﬁce or are'entrusted to him by the Governing Board

IV. AMENDMENTS

The by—laws, or its equivalent, may be amended or repealed by the afﬁrmative vote of at least a majority of the Governing Board at any meeting called for that purpose. However, the power to amend, modify, repeal or adopt new by—laws may be revoked only by _____________________.