Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. No. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila
1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-95-02, 711-95-03; Telefax No. (632) 743-18-29

<date>08/03/2006</date>

<doctype>Administrative Order</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006- 0017</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Incentive Scheme Framework for Enhancing Inter-LGU Coordination in Health through Inter-Local Health Zones (ILHZ) and Ensuring their Sustainable Operations</subject>

<body>
I. Rationale/Background:

Prior to the implementation of the Local Government Code (LGC) of 1991, the basic unit of operations, administration and budget authority in the nation's public health system was the health district, which comprised of a provincial or district public hospital together with the health centers or Rural Health Units and barangay health stations within the hospital's service area or catchment barangays, municipalities, and cities. This arrangement followed WHO recommendations on a district health system approach to providing primary health care coverage for all. The LGC of 1991, however, devolved the administration and budget authority for provincial and district hospitals to provincial governments, while the administration and budget of health centers and barangay health stations were incorporated with those of municipal and city governments.

Much of the efforts at DOH and LGUs since 1991 had been focused on building a well-functioning and high-performing public health system nationwide by getting all LGUs to each respectively perform their correspondingly assigned public health functions, i.e., provincial governments for clinical care in public hospitals and municipal/city governments for community health outreach through health centers and barangay health stations. DOH initiatives such, as Sentrong Sigla certification and Philhealth accreditation of health centers and hospitals, are similarly focUsed on assuring communities of high quality public providers under their respective LGUs. This effort is consistent with the pertinent provisions under Section 17 of the LGC on basic services for LGUs to "endeavor to be self-reliant and continue exercising the powers and discharging the duties and functions currently vested upon them as well as the functions and responsibilities of national agencies and offices devolved to them."

In recent years, however, DOH and LGUshave been reminded of the importance of coordinating the operations of hospitals under provincial governments with those of health centers and barangay health stations of geographically adjacent municipalities and cities, that together serve a common area and population. First of all several provincial municipal and city governments simply continued the coordinated operations of their pre-devolution health districts despite the effects of devolving the administration and budget authority of different parts of these health districts to different LGUs. Secondly, the increased visibility of common health threats, such as polio eradication, outbreaks of SARS and meningo-coccemia, among others. highlighted the need for a reliable institutional ability by the decentralized public health network to take prompt, unified and organized action to protect the health of populations living across several LGUs.

Third, a number of provincial governments began noticing that the hospitals they are administering and financing seem to bear excessive operational and financial burdens due partly to weaknesses or failures in basic health care at communities and health centers. For instance, many provincial and district hospitals bear the costs of care for hospitalized cases of measles, diarrhea, pneumonia and uncomplicated normal deliveries, many of which can be either prevented or cared for at home, community or health centers at a fraction of their hospitalization costs. Finally, the recent introduction of F1 health investment planning in 16 convergence provinces have encouraged provinces and their component municipal and city governments to begin planning together province-wide investments in health development. This exercise is helping LGUs at different levels adopt a local health systems approach where prudent, coordinated and well-selected investments at community and health centers can complement similarly prudent coordinated and well-selected investments at public hospitals.

These developments remind DOH and LGUs that strengthening public health capabilities at each. locality and each level of government must also be complemented by improving inter-LGU coordination in health operations among different localities and across levels of government. And the LGC also recognized the importance and value of such inter-LGU coordination. Section 3 (f) of the LGC provides that LGUs "may group themselves, consolidate or coordinate their efforts services and resources for purposes commonly beneficial to them." This mandate for several LGUs to group themselves, consolidate or coordinate for their mutual benefit is operationalized by Article 61 (b) of the rates and regulations implementing the LGC of 1991 which states that these LGUs "may, upon approval by the sanggunian concerned after public hearing conducted for the purpose contribute funds real estate, equipment and other kinds of property and appoint or assign personnel under such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the participating LGUs through a Memorandum of Agreement."

Accordingly, a national policy framework to encourage inter-LGU coordination in health operations, is deemed consistent with the spirit and substance of the LGC also supportive of improved public health as among those purposes commonly beneficial to several communities, and is thus considered as the proper basis for incentive schemes that will support sustainable operations. This Order seeks to provide such a framework.

II. Statement/Declaration of Policy

It is the national policy to enhance the capacity of LGUs to improve public health conditions of their respective localities through, among others, their exercise of local autonomy towards improved coordination in health operations with other LGUs in accordance with the LGC of 1991. in support of such a policy, the Department of Health, as the prime national agency for health, shall create and maintain an institutional environment, including incentive schemes, that encourage and enhance inter-LGU coordination, and support and ensure their sustainable operations.

III. Goal and Objectives

General Goal:

To secure for the Filipino people the benefits of an efficient effective and equitable health system that delivers improved health outcomes distributes fairly the financial burden of health care and assures public satisfaction.

Specific Objectives:

1. To enable LGUs to recognize and appreciate the benefits of inter-LGU coordination as a key mechanism to attain their respective local health goals and also contribute to attain the shared health goals of the nation.

2. To facilitate practice of inter-LGU coordination, particularly among clusters of LGUs that together serve a common population within a contiguous area, that supports local health operations yielding the following benefits: (a) more effective population-wide disease control and health risks reduction; (b) assured continuity of quality patient care across the spectrum of services essential to meeting individual health needs and (c) more efficient use of scarce resources for health.

3. To rationalize DOH policies, programs, projects, activities and incentive schemes affecting health operations at localities, in order to support and encourage inter-LGU coordination towards functional and sustainable inter-local health zones.

IV. Scope or Coverage

The policy encompasses the operation of all agencies comprising the Department of Health including its attached agencies like the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation and the Commission on Population upon concurrence by these agencies' respective governing Boards, which the Secretary of Health chairs. It also covers the operation of government agencies Under the various national agencies and departments (DBM, DepED, DND, among others) as well as those under the local governments at province city and municipal levels in so far as these agencies' policies and programs affect public health and are thus governed by technical guidelines and standards mandated by the DOH. It further covers private entities (persons and enterprises) engaged in the provision of health goods and services in so far as their operations are similarly governed by technical guidelines and standards mandated by the DOH.

V. Definition of Terms

1. Inter-LGU coordination in health operations: The actions of two or more LGUs to jointly adopt and implement in a coordinated manner a common set of policies, programs, projects or activities in order to achieve common health goals or purposes.

2. Inter-local health zones (ilhz): Any form of organized arrangement for coordinating the operations of an array and hierarchy of health providers and facilities serving a common population within a local geographic area under the jurisdictions of more than one local government (e.g., a sub-provincial ilhz consisting of several municipalities with the province; a province-wide ilhz consisting of one province and its component municipalities and cities; a multi-province ilhz consisting of several provinces with their component municipalities and cities) which includes the following key operating elements namely:

a) Primary health providers: All health providers within the zone that responds to the routine and immediate first-contact needs of individuals, households and communities. This usually includes health centers rural health units, barangay health stations, as well as private clinics of physicians and other practitioners. 

b) Core referral hospital(s): One or more hospital provider within the zone that delivers services meeting needs at first referral level beyond the routine technical capacity of primary health providers

c) End referral hospital(s): One or more hospital provider within normal travel reach of patients from the zone that delivers definitive care for needs beyond the routine technical capacity of primary providers and core referral hospitals.

3. F1 or Fourmula One for Health: the DOH's policy and operational framework for implementing the health sector reform agenda.

VI. General Guidelines

A. The F1 Framework encompasses inter-LGU coordination in health

The F1 framework for implementing health sector reforms applies to inter-LGU coordination in health as follows:

l) The goals of enhancing inter-LGU Coordination in health operations are the same as the objectives of F1 namely: wider access to and availability of essential and basic health packages: greater assurance of quality and affordability of health goods and services: secure sustained financing for health and: improved performance of health system.

2) Inter-LGU coordination in health shall also be enhanced through the implementation of a package of the four Fl components namely: regulation, service delivery, financing and governance.

3) In regulation, inter-LGU coordinatIonin health shall seek to achieve similar levels of compliance with critical standards among providers and facilities located in proximate localities.

4) In service delivery, inter-LGU coordination in health shall seek to promote organized sharing. systemic referrals and collectively planned and achieved performance targets among local health providers serving proximate localities.

5) In financing, inter-LGU coordination in health shall encourage among proximate localities as far as possible equitable sharing of financial burdens of costs of care, with appropriate adjustments for the situation of poorer localities and poorer households.

6) In governance, inter-LGU coordination in health, with the involvement of the community through a participatory process, shall seek to build organized planning, decision-making, management and resource allocation among proximate LGUs with joint stakes in a shared local health system serving a common beneficiary population

B. Guiding principles of inter-LGU coordination in health

The desired practice of inter-LGU coordination in health that is consistent with LGC of 1991 as well as with the directions of F1 is characterized by the following guiding principles:

1) Voluntary action for mutual benefits: Inter-LGU coordination in health comprises voluntary actions that are driven and motivated by the common desire for mutual benefits. LGUs coordinating with each other is a consequence of their discretionary exercise of their respective autonomous powers to cooperate with any other potential partners in order to secure mutually beneficial results in the health of their constituents

2) Flexible forms of organization that are non-exclusive: Inter-LGU coordination in health may take any organizational form, arrangement and structure acceptable to the LGUs involved (i.e. flexible forms). LGUs can be part of one or more cooperative inter-LGU arrangements in health at the same time (i.e., non-exclusive). LGUs participating in inter-LGU coordination may use various mechanisms such as MOAs, joint projects, informal understandings of local chief executives, organized local economic enterprises or any other entity that LGUs' may legally form to coordinate with each other.

3) Results-oriented: DOH attention on inter-LGU coordination in health shall be focused on results generated by such coordination in terms of shared health benefits derived by local populations living in those LGUs coordinating with each other. The mechanics, structures or processes that LGUs adopt to operationalize and institutionalize their coordination shall be matters left to the discretion and authority of LGUs.

4) Sustained and evolutionary: inter-LGU coordination in health shall be regarded as a long-term process of institution building and organized learning for all LGUs. LGUs participating in coordinated inter-LGU mechanisms will learn from their experiences and further improve the quality of their coordination based on their learning. Such a process will yield more benefits over time as inter-LGU coordination practice is sustained and evolves in response to changes in conditions, needs, capabilities and preferences of LGUs involved.

5) Purposive and developmental: DOH shall seek to influence the development of inter-LGU coordination in health in order to be progressive (i.e., better) over time. While forms of inter-LGU organizations and practices in coordination among LGUs will change over time, their evolution should lead to serving enduring shared purposes of participating LGUs for local health systems that develop to become more effective, efficient and equitable in meeting the people's changing needs.

6) Universal and non-partisan: Inter-LGU coordination in health includes everyone within the jurisdictions of the LGUs involved. Within the scope of inter-LGU coordination it is universal in its population coverage and non-partisan in its extension of benefits to everyone regardless of political or religious beliefs or socio-economic or ethnic status.

C. Provincial governments as stewards of province-wide inter-LGU coordination in health

As local governments with component LGUs. provincial governments have an institutional responsibility to serve as stewardsI facilitators and key partners of province-wide inter-LGU coordination in health at their respective provinces.

1) As the LGU with the broadest jurisdiction in the province, provincial governments have an operational responsibility for coordinating health services throughout the whole province. including its component municipalities and cities as well as chartered cities with populations whose health are affected by, and in turn affect, the health of the population of the Whole province.

2) As the LGU that absorbed the provincial health office, provincial governments assume the field coordination functions and technical leadership responsibilities of the DOH as far as province-wide coordination of local health policies, programs, projects and activities are concerned.

3) As the LGU responsible for local public hospitals, provincial governments have an inherent interest in the efficient effective and equitable functioning of the province-wide health system at all levels because the operations and financing of public hospital services are unavoidably affected by the performance of community-level providers meeting health needs prior to hospitalization.

4) Provincial governments are also the best positioned LGUs to establish cross border coordination with other provinces that together face the same health risks best managed in unified and concerted multi-province efforts

D. Contiguous municipalities and cities as key players in inter-LGU coordination

Municipalities and cities. that are geographically clustered together and with populations that routinely inter-mingle with each other are key players in inter-LGU coordination. Inter-LGU coordination in health among contiguous municipalities and cities is expected to be most intense and complex for the following reasons:

1) Persons and families residing in such closely proximate LGUs usually share common risks to health, particularly in terms of their shared degree of exposure to communicable and transmissible-infections (e.g., TB, malaria, schistosomiasis. vaccine-preventable diseases among others). LGUs seeking effective protection for their respective populations will need to coordinate their efforts with proximate LGUs.

2) Individual municipalities or cities by themselves almost always do not have sufficiently large populations to efficiently support a full complement of necessary health care provisions. Only the total aggregate sizes of the combined populations of proximate LGUs are large enough to collectively support and efficiently utilize a complete array and hierarchy of health care provisions from primary providers to core referral to end referral hospitals.

3) Closely proximate LGUs often represent localities that, together, are often economically integrated culturally homogenous. and whose populations invariably regard themselves or are regarded by others as one community with common public health goals.

E. Consultative and consensual delineation-lot areas for inter-LGU coordination in health

Provincial governments, in consultation with municipal and city governments, shall delineate the component LGU jurisdictions that can best sustain organized and mutually beneficial inter-LGU coordination in health for various purposes such as: common response to shared health risks, shared use of key health care provisions (like hospitals), or for economic, social, cultural or historical reasons. Such delineations may be made province-wide, if possible. or, if necessary, in sub-provincial segments. Such delineations may be altered or revised subject to consensual agreement among the LGUs involved.

F. Formation of inter-local health zones

Localities delineated as areas for intensive inter-LGU coordination in health may form an inter-local health zone. As a matter of policy. DOH is encouraging all LGUs to become part of one or more inter-local health zone(s) as a major mechanism for strengthening and improving inter-LGU coordination in health. DOH institutional support and policy-based incentive schemes in reform and development of local health systems shall include a focus on functional inter-local health zones as the main mechanism for good inter-LGU coordination in health in order to ensure sustainable operations. The organizational nature of an inter-local health zone may vary among the following forms:

1) Formally organized inter-local health zone: one where the participating LGUs have signed a MOA or any formal agreement that embodies the specific terms and conditions of their joint health undertaking.

2) Informally organized inter-local health zone: one where the participating LGUs conduct coordinated health operations even without a formal written agreement.

3) DOH-initiated inter-local health zone: one where the DOHis advocating closer inter-LGU coordination among specific LGUs. which may not have decided yet to form either a formal or an informal inter-local health zone. This situation may arise when DOH has mapped a group of contiguous localities that: (a) share common health risks similarly affecting all their localities (e.g., affected by TB, malaria, schistosomiasis networks of high risk behaviors associated with HIV-AIDS infection, among others); or (b) could collectively support and conveniently utilize an efficient and equitable way of sharing public hospital provisions. The localities concerned have, however not yet recognized or accepted these reasons for forming an inter-local health zone.

These three forms of inter-local health zones may co-exist or may be merely stages in the development of inter-LGU coordination. For example. a DOH-initiated ilhz may evolve into an informally organized ilhz and eventually become a formally organized one.

VII. Specific Guidelines

A. The Diagnostic Instrument to assess and monitor the quality of inter-LGU coordination in health shall be through measuring functionality of inter-local health zones

1) DOH will objectively monitor the auaIity of inter-LGU coordination in health among different clusters of LGUs primarily through continuous regular assessment of the functionality of inter-local health zones. Whatever may be the organizational forms of inter-local health zones) whether these are formally organized informally organized or DOH-initiated the DOH will use the same diagnostic instrument (described below) to assess these different zones' functionality at this time and their evolution or development in the future.

2) Good inter-LGU coordination in health is based on the benefits secured by the people living in those LGUs that are coordinating with each other. Thus functionality of inter-local health zones shall be defined mainly by observable zone-wide health sector performance results in terms of (a) improved health status and coverage of public health intervention of the zone's population (b) access by everyone in the zone to quality care. and (c) efficiency in the operations of inter-local health services.

3) Zone performance in these three categories of results shall be the basis for assessing the functionality of inter-local health zones. These three categories of results are delineated into three functional domains namely: (a) population-wide health improvement and coverage with public health intervention; (b) continuity in meeting individual patient care needs across levels of health services: (c) efficient use of scarce resources for health. The scope of each of these three functional domains are further detailed below.

4) Each functional domain is associated with a distinct set of concrete health benefits that good inter-LGU coordination should help produce. inter-LGU coordination is good and the inter-local health zone is functional when: (a) proximate localities undertake joint and concerted public health action for the most effective disease control effort and maximum reduction of health risks in their population (evidenced by indicators of population-wide health improvement); (b) proximate localities organize their service provisions of different levels to attain the most feasible and sustainable way of satisfactorily meeting varying needs for individual patient care (evidenced by indicators of continuity of care provided to individual patients); (c) proximate legalities, maximize sharing of capabilities and coordination of activities to get the most collective health benefits from scarce resources available (evidenced by indicators of efficient use of scarce resources for health).

5) The three functional domains are inter-related; progress in one facilitates progress in others; weakness in one hinders progress in others. Assessment ratings at each functional domain suggest specific points of possible improvements in inter-LGU coordination in health.

6) Zone assessment ratings across all functional domains for different inter-local health zones may be compared or contrasted even if the organizational forms of zones vary. A zone's assessment ratings in one period may be tracked against its ratings from another period

7) Given the overall assessment ratings for the whole zone, individual LGUs within the zone retain full discretion and authority to decide and act on ways to improve the quality and results of inter-LGU coordination in health through their inter-local health zones.

B. Zone performance in three categories of results, delineated as the following three functional domains shall be the basis of assessing functionality of interlocal health zones:

Functional Domain 1: Coordination for maximum Improvement of population's health

This domain considers adequate population coverage of basic public health services, progress towards attaining MDG targets, and control of priority diseases of public health importance across all localities in the whole zone. The more functional inter-local health zones show rising or high zone-wide average of each indicator with decreasing or narrow variations among component localities in each indicator.

Desired indicators for this domain are:

TB control:
universal access to high-quality sputum microscopy examination:
case detection rate of 70%; and
cure rate of 85%

Malaria control:
100% coverage of correct treatment for clinically diagnosed and confirmed cases
at least 80% of population at risk to malaria using insecticide treated bed net

Maternal Care and family planning:
80% of pregnant women given at least TT2
80% of pregnant women with at least 4 ANC visits
80% of deliveries attendedIby skilled. health professional
60% contraceptive prevalence rate for modern methods (no unmet need for FF)

Child care:
95% fully immunized coverage
60% of mothers practicing exclusive breast feeding for 6 months
100% of sick children accessing IMCI-compliant providers
90% coverage of Vitamin A and iron supplementation
No severely malnourished child

Environmental health:
100% of households with access to safe water supply
100% of households using sanitary toilets
Universal reach of an adequate solid waste management facility

Functional Domain 2: Coordination for continuity of quality care to individual patients

This domain considers presence of hierarchy of-health service provisions (i.e., home, community, clinic, core referral hospital and end referral hospital) within physical and financial reach of all persons in need of care, with adequate mechanisms for smooth patient management across the hierarchy of services depending on case requirements, and for assuring the poor and disadvantaged can access care they need. The more functional ilhz's demonstrate progress towards meeting the indicators, identifying gaps and weaknesses in each indicator and having plans and resources to close gaps or correct weaknesses.

Desired indicators for this domain are:

High quality service provisions available:
- Full menu of FP methods available across the system
- Quality assurance of sputum microscopy present
- Functional cold chain management for EPI at different levels
- Zero stock-outs of essential commodities for priority public health programs
- All facilities meet at least SS certification, Level 1
- 100% of public facilities complying with CPGs
- 50% of private medical clinics complying with CPGs
- 100% of private hospitals complying with CPGs

Use of services is appropriate:
- Minimum admissions of primary level cases at hospitals
- increased number of normal deliveries at primary health care facilities
- Medically unattended deaths reduced and eliminated

Working mechanisms for access and referral:
- 80% population enrolled under NHIP
- 100% of facilities PhilHealth-accredited
- Functional patient feedback and client survey mechanism
- Safety net of free basic health services for the poor present
- Patient referral and transport procedures and facilities functioning

Functional Domain 3: Coordination to minimize .total costs of full range of health provisions

This domain considers most efficient use of available health care resources (facilities, equipment, staff supplies funds)  or maximum benefit to the zone's whole population. The more functional inter-local health zones develop arrangements that yield more health benefits from the improved operation of their local health system.

Desired indicators for this domain are:

Widest use by population of available public and private hospitals based on high occupancy rates for appropriate cases admitted
Arrangements for sharing staff equipment facilities
Arrangements for public-private mix in TB, maternal care, family planning and child care
Functional disease surveillance system
Functional health information system
Functional health planning system
Functional disaster and emergency response system
Functional management arrangement encompassing all zone providers
Client segmentation system to target free services only to poor

C. Supportive measures to promote wider LGU practice of inter-LGU coordination towards functional inter-local health zones

1) DOH shall develop its disease program and service delivery standards to become adaptable to inter-local health zones as the basic unit of public health operations.

2) DOH shall organize and mobilize technical assistance resources to assist LGUs seeking to establish beneficial forms and types of inter-LGU coordination without any prior requirement for formal organization.

3) DOH shall develop and execute new training programs for managers health workers and policy makers working within the context of inter-LGU coordination and inter-local health zones.

4) DOH shall assist LGUs engaged in inter-LGU coordination or working in inter-local health zones to adopt and maintain appropriate information systems.

5) DOH shall extend assistance to facilitate inter-LGU coordination and establishment of inter-local health zones depending on the desires and preferences of LGUs.

6) DOH shall re-orient the management and operations of DOH-retained hospitals in order to position these public hospitals, as core referral or end-referral hospitals (as appropriate) in the respective inter-local health zones where they might belong. DOH-retained hospitals as a policy will participate actively with concerned LGUs in the formation of inter-local health zones in their geographic areas of operation.

D. Incentive Schemes for inter-LGU coordination and inter-local health zones

1. Incentive schemes could promote inter-LGU coordination for achieving functional inter-local health zones in order to support and ensure sustainable operations. Coordinating services at multiple levels by multiple providers serving the same population is the most effective approach to population-wide disease control and also assures continuity of care to individual patients. Coordinating services coming from all providers serving one population promotes rational planning of capacity and achieves high levels of correct use of care that improve health outcomes Coordinating services also promotes learning and growth in local health systems management that lead to increasing satisfaction from stakeholders and clients. Coordination improves efficiency in covering a wider population with health services at lesser capital and operational-costs. Coordinated delivery of services ultimately improves benefits and secures gains in health outcomes. It also improves access, particularly for the poor, and reduces disparities of outcomes among different groups in the population. For all these reasons, public financing of incentives for improved inter-LGU coordination is justified.

2. Incentive schemes shall recognize inter-local health zones as an important mechanism for voluntary inter-LGU coordination. DOH shall identify available sources of disposable funds, free goods and free services that can be mobilized and dispensed as incentives to LGUs practicing good inter-LGU coordination and establishing functional inter-local health zones. The total incentive package may consist of additional commodities beyond the normal allocations, additional access to specialized training and technical assistance, access to grants or donations, provision of extra equipment items, and provision of financial grants for special purposes.

3. As a principle, all LGUs working as groups (e.g., by single or multiple provinces, or by sub-provincial clusters) are eligible to receive these incentives. LGUs working together as groups may define the scope of their inter-LGU coordination or inter-local health zones to cover only some health services (e.g., TB control, malaria control, maternal care and family planning, integrated management of childhood illnesses. HIV-AIDS prevention, or any set of such services) or encompass the full range of all health services. LGUs coordinating for only some health services shall also be eligible to receive the, incentives.

4. Incentive schemes shall promote progressive development of higher degrees of functionality of inter-local health zones, without regard for the specific mechanisms, geographical coverage and institutional arrangements utilized by LGUs to establish and sustain their respective inter-local health zones. The currently prevailing concept of ILHZ with prescribed institutional arrangements, as well as any other alternative arrangements of ILHZ that achieve the desired outcome and functionalities of ILHZ, shall be equally eligible for the incentive schemes.

5. The implementation of the incentive schemes shall be based on competitive ratings of inter-local health zones in the three functional domains described in Section (B) of the Specific Guidelines above, for various designs of incentive schemes. Existing inter-local health zones (including formally organized, informally organized and DOH-initiated) shall be assessed using the diagnostic instrument described in Section (A) and (D) under Specific Guidelines above. Incentive schemes should be designed for highest rated zones in the three functional domains. LGUs participating in high-performing zones eligible to incentives shall be the primary recipients and beneficiaries of the incentive awards. Various groupings of inter-local health zones may be made to recognize zones that demonstrate strengths or improvements in some indicators of some domains despite not rating highly in all the domains. Incentive schemes should also be designed for these zones in order to encourage them to continue progressing.

VIII. Implementation ArrangementiMechanisms

A. General Procedures to Establishing incentives for inter-LGU Coordination and ILHZ

I. The Department of Health shall develop a number of incentive programs for inter-LGU coordination and ILHZ in order to ensure sustainable operations. The number and specifications of incentive programs under which groups of LGUs are eligible shall be based on available resources, health program priorities, and extent of incremental gains attained. DOH shall specify a detailed definition of the various incentive programs that might be by regions or types of localities (e.g.. highly urbanized or rural localities) or by scope of health services included, or by levels of improvement over time. The announced incentive programs available shall serve as guide for groups of LGUs to join and compete according to their combined health needs and priorities. LGU incentive programs available will be announced to LGUs annUally by the DOH.

2. Inter-local health zones that are awarded incentives shall access their incentive awards by their component LGUs making proposals for their programs and activities that will be supported by DOH-mobilized resources. LGUs comprising the zone granted an incentive award shall submit proposals that specify in a given time frame the inputs and activities that will be covered by the incentive award for building their capacity for increasing degrees of functionality of interlocal health zone. The LGUs' proposals shall consider the actual needs, level of maturity and current situations of the proponent LGUs. The incentive award shall define the levels and types of resources available to the zone and the individual LGUs in the zone shall decide through their proposals on how the incentive award will be best utilized by the different LGUs comprising the zone.

3. The LGU proposals shall be appraised by the DOH according to the projected extent of incremental gains expected from further improvements in the zone's functionality, given available levels and types of resources for the incentive awards.

B. Functional Arrangement

1. DOH offices with mandates and functions dependent in LGU performance included in the three domains of functionality of inter-local health zones shall focus their attention on achieving their national targets through improving the functionality of inter-local health zones in the specific indicators related to their concerns. For example, the public health programs should focus on raising zone performance in their specific indicators as part of functional domain 1. Quality assurance programs should focus their attention on zone performance in functional domain 2. Rationalization of facilities should be focused on improving zone performance in functional domain 3. As far as practical the DOH agenda with respect to LGUs should be incorporated in the promotion of inter-LGU coordination through functional inter-local health zones.

2. Development of health sector capacity to establish functional interlocal health zones shall be prioritized and shall be required benchmarks in implementing performance based budgets for DOH offices. Benchmarks shall include consistency of all incentive schemes and LGU support packages with developing functionality of interlocal health zones in order to ensure sustainable ILHZ operations.

3. The performance of CHDs in assisting LGUs secure competitive incentive grants and in assisting LGUS achieve benchmarks required in grants secured will be linked to the additional allocation of a budgetary amount equivalent to no more than 10% of grant amount received by LGU.

C. Roles and Responsibilities

Department of Health (Central Office)

1. Develop policies. programs. guidelines and standards consistent with, and supportive of this order
2. Develop training and technical assistance packages systems and tools that will support LGUs' to increase increasing functionality of their inter-local health zones
3. Develop a variety of incentive packages to promote functional ilhz's
4. Monitor overall levels of functionality of all inter-local health zones in the country and identify areas of progress or weaknesses
5. Document progressive practices in DOH interventions, zone-wide performance, and LGU actions towards inter-LGU coordination for possible replication
6. Develop monitoring and assessment tools and indicators on inter-LGU coordination in health
7. Evaluate performance of CHDs in promoting inter-LGU coordination, improving functionality of inter-local health zones and assisting LGUs coordinate better
8. Evaluate LGU proposals for incentive awards and develop mechanisms to monitor actual implementation of projects supported by these awards

Center for Health Development (CHD)

1. Identify the formally and informally organized inter-local health zones in the region, including their component LGUs
2. Delineate inter-local health zones in areas where LGUs are not yet operating as either formally or informally organized inter-local health zones
3. Undertake baseline assessment of functionality of ilhz's in the region
4. Establish system of collecting data and information that can regularly update the region's assessment of functionality of ilhz's
5. Post announced opportunities for incentive package grants to LGUs, explain guidelines, criteria, and other terms of the grant to LGUs in order to ensure that LGUs in their coverage area maximize all grant opportunities available to attain outcomes and full ILHZ functionality
6. Organize regional efforts to provide advocacy, training and technical assistance to LGUs on inter-LGU coordination in health and for functional inter-local health zones.
7. Assist in documenting good/best practices for replication

Local Government Units (LGUs)

1. Participate in an inter-local health zone
2. Conduct self-assessment of their zone based on the indicators developed
3. Identify opportunities and mechanisms to raise the levels of functionality of their zone for their own common benefit
4. Utilize resources made available by DOH, either through regular programs or through incentive awards, to further improve the functionality of their zone
5. Prepare proposals for using incentive awards to further improve functionality of their zone

IX. Repealing/ Separability Clause

All administrative orders rules or regulation inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

In the event that any provision or part of this Order be declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective.

X. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.
</body>

<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>