Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1 San Lazaro Compound Rizal Avenue Sta. Cruz Manila Philippines
TEL NOS (632} 711-9592; 711-9503 and 781-4362; Telefax No. (632) 743-1829



<date>15/6/2006</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 29,s. 2006</docnum>

<subject>Guidelines for Rationalizing the Health Care Delivery System based on Health Needs</subject>

<body>
1. Introduction
Background
An analysis of the current health care delivery system in the country shows a lot of uncoordinated and irrational efforts from all health facilities and health providers, from both the public and private sector. Public and private health service facilities and health providers exist, but almost exclusively operate distinctly separate from each other. A large proportion of poor households rely on publicly provided services, which are free or low-cost but are, with exception of most DOH hospitals and some large provincial hospitals, widely considered to be of substantially poorer quality than private services.

Primary care offered by government providers in RHU’s, HCs and BHS’s is relatively strong in primary health care like maternal and child “health care (MCH) and public health but weak on primary medical or curative care. Resources are lacking and quality is wanting. The number of doctors in government primary care facilities is very low at 1:45,000, as compared with the national standard of 1:20,000. Furthermore, doctors working alone in a RHU spend much of their time on administrative tasks (meetings, training, administration, programs, etc.). Thus, instead of physicians, mostly nurses and midwives provide primary curative care.

This leads poor families to seek health care from private providers whenever possible, or to go to higher level government hospitals even if specialist care is not needed at all. This unnecessarily increases the cost of health care, because, studies show that approximately 80-85% of all patients can be treated with lesser cost at primary level as outpatients by qualified primary medical care professionals.

Statistical data show that there are many hospitals. However, the supply is unregulated and is concentrated where there is greater demand and financial remuneration, or where there is strong political will. Also, it is composed mostly of very small hospitals with only 10-20 beds without p roper specialist care, and thus languish because they are significantly underutilized, but with high maintenance costs. On the other hand, larger hospitals with medical specialists are overcrowded, attending mostly to patients that can be treated at lower level hospitals, or at primary medical care centers.
The lack of quality primary curative care is a substantial cause of these inappropriate patient referrals and medical attendance at higher levels of hospital care. It is thus not uncommon to see first level hospitals extensively doing primary medical care which can be done at RHUs. This results in inefficient and inappropriate use of resources in the health delivery system which drives up the cost of the health care delivery system. The inefficiencies of the current health care delivery system are further exacerbated by inadequate physical facilities, variable clinical practices, insufficient supply of health professionals, and weak management. And, despite the many public and private health facilities and providers, many people find it financially inaccessible because of limited social health insurance.

Rationale

Critical reforms are needed to rationalize the health care delivery system covering both government and private facilities and providers. This ensures uniform access for PhilHealth enrolled patients regardless of ownership of facility.

Rationalization of the health care delivery system can drastically lower the rapid rise in cost of the health care system, by reducing excess capacity, particularly in expensive hospital facilities, and concentrating services where it is most needed. Cost is extensively reduced also by coordinating a continuum of hospital, primary care and home based care, and removing wasteful duplication of services. By providing appropriate access to the right facilities in the right places and with the right professionals, rationalization should be able to guarantee the conditions of delivering good quality care in the health system.

The roles of the State as stated in the Constitution are the major justifications for the responsibility of the Government with regard to ensuring the quality, and accessibility of health care services, and, controlling cost in the health care sector in the country. State-sanctioned Government intervention in the health care sector has become even more imperative with the increasing number of the population belonging to the marginalized sector of the society. The rising cost of health care compromises quality and access to health services, particularly for the poor. The proliferation of health technology and health facilities, increases maintenance costs, but also increases demand, with a resulting further rise in the overall cost to the health system.

Anchored on the goals and thrusts of the Department of Health’s FOURmula ONE for Health (Fl)- Health Service Delivery, Health Regulation, Health Financing and Good Governance for Health- quality of health care services should be continually improved and compliance to regulatory standards should be regularly monitored. To promote adherence to these principles, the Department of Health recognizes the need to rationalize the Health Care Delivery System in the country to ensure equitable access to quality health care for every Filipino.
II. OBJECTIVES
1. To improve health outcomes, responsiveness and equity in. the health care delivery system
2. To ensure the right and access of every Filipino to quality health care services, and with special attention to the marginalized sectors of society
3. To promote efficient use of health care facilities and resources
4. To reduce the financial burden of Operating and of paying for services of health care facilities
III. SCOPE / COVERAGE 
This guidelines shall provide the mandate and directions for all DOH offices in developing the rationalization of health care delivery systems in the country. The guidelines shall be applicable for all health care facilities and health providers operating within health care delivery systems in a specific area, "who seek to rationalize their health care delivery system based on health needs. These include public and private health providers, national and local public hospitals, health centers and RHUs
IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS
The following terms are defined as follows:
1. Functional Interlocal Health Zone(ILHZ) - any local institutional arrangement that produces the outcomes and functionalities desired for interlocal health zones.
2. Health Care Delivery System - the network of health facilities, health providers, services and personnel which carry out the task of rendering health care to the people
3. Health Needs - an estimation of all care based on professional judgment and current medical technology of services necessary to provide an optimum standard of health care.
4. Health facilities. - refer to institutions that provide diagnosis, therapeutics, rehabilitative and other health care services.
5. Health providers - refer to health professionals providing diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative and other health care services
6. Hospital - a health care facility for the diagnosis, treatment care by medical specialists or other health care providers that provide specialist outpatient care, day care or emergency care and in-patient care in bassinets or beds for 24-hour use or longer by patients in the management of deformities, diseases, injuries, abnormal physical and mental conditions and maternity cases.

7. Primary health care - is a broad concept focusing on prevention of diseases and disabilities by changing lifestyle, behavior, vaccinations, early detection of diseases, etc.

8. Primary care - ambulatory care accessed at first level of service and functions are composed of primary health care and primary medical care.

9. Public Health - a task of government focused on protection of the community for diseases. It is substantially composed of primary health care tasks but may include primary care functions like vaccinations, under-five-c1inics, etc.

10. Primary Medical Care - focused on patients who consult the primary care provider with a complaint or chronic illness and ask for treatment

11. Secondary and tertiary care - refers to advanced curative care for complicated conditions and disorders delivered by appropriately trained and experienced medical practitioners in both private and government health care facilities.

12. Strategic Health Care Delivery Plan - refers to the Strategic Health Care Delivery Plan which covers all health care facilities and professionals within the health system

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES

1. Rationalization of health care delivery system based on health needs shall be guided by national and local health goals and outcomes desired. Economic, political, cultural, geographic and demographic situation prevailing in the area, which can influence attainment of desired outcomes, shall also be considered in negotiations on strategies and agreements for rationalization.

2. Rationalization shall support the fulfillment of the purposes of decentralizing health services, the autonomy of LGUs to asses and develop its healthcare delivery system, and the pursuit of LGUs for increasing levels of functionality and coordination in interlocal health zones (ILHZ). DOH shall provide assistance in terms of expertise and technical assistance, to support efforts at rationalizing healthcare delivery system.

3. It shall recognize and utilize existing relevant international and national standard (eg. Millennium Development Goals, National Objectives for Health, DOH licensing, Sentrong Sigla Certification, and PHIC accreditation standards), and local instruments for institutionalizing all strategies and agreements (i.e. Local Health Boards, Provincial Health and Investment Plans, Provincial Health Budgets, Resolutions and ordinances, etc.)

4. It shall be done through a participative approach, with the LGUs working together with all stakeholders, public and private, as well as national and local health providers within its health system and health referral networks. Agreements shall be made through a negotiated process

5. It is necessarily a strategic and developmental process-taking place over the medium and long term (5-10 year) period. Selective development and investments shall prioritize development and completion of more progressive and cost effective primary care facilities, before pursuing completion of more complex higher level health care facilities.

VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES

A Comprehensive and careful development of rationalizing health care delivery system based on needs will ensure its success. Different health care systems may require varied components. Some common key requirements are health care needs assessment, investment planning, stakeholder analysis, social mobilization, information dissemination, active monitoring and evaluation,

A. Health Care Needs Assessment

1. The Province / City/ILHZ shall conduct a self- assessment of its current health care needs together with a situational analysis of its health facilities, health providers and resources to benchmark against the standards set by DOH. This will allow the Province/City to identify the gaps that will have to be addressed with appropriate strategies and action plans.

2. This shall include:

a) Health care needs analysis which discusses the health profile and disease patterns of the communities, including epidemiology, demography, health indices, etc.

b) Health resource anal sis which describes the quantity, distribution, structural characteristics and utilization of health care facilities and health providers, particularly RHUs and local government hospitals, and professionals.
c) Benchmarking against DOH standards which analyzes:
       1) the gaps between current health needs and DOH recommended health indices and
2) the gaps between current resources and DOH reference standards for health facilities and professionals.

This will enable the Plan to specify desirable resource levels and target health outcomes.

3. Health Care Needs Analysis - The health care needs are reflected by the basic health indices as well as critical programmatic indicators. Examples of these are morbidity and mortality rates, coverage rates and target of priority public health programs. They are directly correlated with geographic and temporal distribution, demographic characteristics, epidemiologic information financial accessibility, social status, healthy lifestyles, gender, education, etc. Health care needs analysis should consider the DOH public health disease priority targets, the Millennium
Development Goals, prevalent local health outcomes, the achievement of outcomes desired from inter-LGU coordination in functional ILHZs, and how the Province/City/lLHZ is achieving them. Health and health system outcomes may then be prioritized along health outcomes outlined in Annex A.

1. Health resources analysis. Health resources must be described in terms of health facilities, services and health care professionals practicing in the health system or ILHZ. The number and size, location and distribution, functions and services of government and private health facilities should be related with current data on utilization, performance, patient mix and other indicators of use. The critical functions and performance of RHUs and primary care facilities/providers should be a priority focus of the analysis. Health care professionals must be described in terms of specific disciplines (e.g., doctors, nurses, midwives, etc), locations of practice, hospital affiliations, qualifications and training, etc. Both health facilities and professionals must be correlated with their specific ratios to the population of the catchment area, subject to such modifiers as geographic access, socioeconomic profile, etc.

5. Benchmarking against DOH standards. The DOH standards cover desired levels of health outcomes and services in Fourmula One for Health (e. g. TB mortality rates, PhilHealth coverage, etc) as well as desired levels of health facilities/providers, health professionals and resources relative to the local situation (e. g., bed to population ratio, distance between facilities, etc). The standards for health outcomes and services will use DOH disease priority areas and Millennium Development Goals (Annex A) as reference to assess current extent of achievement of outcomes desired for the health system/ILHZ. The standards for health care facilities and professionals indicate minimum standards of safety and quality that must be complied with by different types of health facilities and professionals. (Annex A).

Analysis of gaps in attaining the DOH standards will guide the health system/ILHZ in formulating plans to compensate for inadequacies in attaining the benchmarks, in mitigating its effects on facility operations and in achieving them in the medium-long term period. 

B. The Strategic Plan to Rationalize Health Care Delivery System Based on Needs
1. The office of the local chief executive, through the Local/ILHZ Health Board in consultation with all major stakeholders and assisted by the Local Planning and Development Offices, shall develop and approve a Strategic Plan for Rationalization of Health Care Delivery System based on health needs. Additionally, an Investment Plan should be developed to address the health care financing mechanisms supporting the implementation and sustainability of the Plan.

2. The Strategic Plan shall map out strategies and actions for rationalizing the health care delivery system. It shall be based from the Health Care Needs Assessment It shall discuss the policies and processes by which the gaps in health outcomes and resources can be addressed. It also describes how the specific strengths of the local health care system can be leveraged for better performance.

The Strategic Plan will define which health facilities and elements will be priority investments and how gaps will be addressed over a period of 5-10 years. The Strategic Plan should be integrated in all relevant health development plans of LGUs and stakeholders involved (e.g. DOH and private providers). Annual plans formulated should be coherent with the Strategic Plan.

3. Elements and Strategies. The Strategic Plan will identify the elements and strategies in the local health delivery system that should be maintained, enhanced or changed, in order to establish a continuum of health care services across all levels of health care, at optimum cost , and to achieve outcomes desired. These elements are:

a. Facilities, including equipment and patient mix
Specific strategies may include but are not limited to the following:
Reorganization, organizational development, appropriate equipping of facilities, expansion of strategic facilities, conversion to more appropriate capacity or purpose in the health care delivery system, merging or satellite hospital arrangements between hospitals, integration, complementary relationships with other facilities, alliances, networking, private-public partnerships, etc. RHUs and local government hospitals must be the priority foci for developing strategies and action plans.
b. Manpower, including supply and capability
Specific strategies m ay include but are not limited to the following: human resource development, cultural transformation, re-engineering, retraining, re-tooling, right sizing, business process outsourcing, etc
c. Rewards and incentives for personnel performance
Specific strategies may include but are not limited to the following: performance appraisal systems, performance benchmarking, career path and development, etc
d. Health care processes, particularly those that manage access to care
Specific strategies may include but are not limited to the following: referral networks to other government and private organizations, resource sharing, medical gate-keeping, etc;

4. Investment Plan: The financial impact of the strategies and activities will be outlined in an Investment Plan to highlight the sources of funds and the utilization of these funds as it relates to the health care programs and projects and strategies outlined in the Plan. The Investment Plan should be able to identify financing alternatives and other organizational arrangements to ensure the sustainability of the Plan. The financial analysis should be able to reflect that utilization of finds would support the attainment of the targeted health outcomes and resources. The investment plan should be coherent and integrated in all local health plans.

5. Approval of the Plan: The Local Health Board shall endorse the Plan for approval by the Provincial Governor/City Mayor. A Provincial/City Ordinance shall be issued by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan / Panglunsod to support the implementation of the Plan.

6. Promulgation and dissemination of the Plan: Following approval, the office of the local health executive should mobilize the entire health system involved to initiate Plan implementation. Organizational structures may be reconfigured to create committees and task forces with clearly defined accountabilities and responsibilities.
Leaders and managers should be selected and oriented to their specific tasks. The Plan must be presented formally and publicly by the local government officials. Leaders must be introduced and members in teams and committees must be recruited.
The information systems that are needed to gather valid and reliable baseline data on health outcomes, services and resources must be set up.

7. Implementation of the Plan. The Office of the Provincial Governor or City Mayor or ILHZ board shall be primarily responsible for the implementation of the Plan. The plan should be reflected in annual local and health system plans. Implementation consists of the following key operations:

a. Leading the change initiatives that will transform the local health care delivery system

b. Communicating the Plan to all stakeholders as well as the population and ensuring buy-in and alignment of stakeholders’ goals. The plan should be widely disseminated and advocated to all stakeholders, particularly the health care facilities and professionals, to maximize understanding and adoption.

c. Managing the rationalization and strategic realignment of annual investments, health facilities, manpower, incentives and health care processes

d. Institutionalizing the changes effected by the Plan and assessing achievement of health care system objectives

8. Monitoring & Evaluation Systems: Progress of implementation of the Plan must be monitored by the Provincial or City Health Office or ILHZ board/management committee, through a systematic process of program evaluation. Evaluation and monitoring tools measuring the extent of achievement of the objectives of rationalization must be developed and used for this purpose. The results of monitoring and evaluation must be fed back to the implementers and policymakers, as well as to the major stakeholders.

C. Stakeholder Mobilization

1. Social mobilization and stakeholder engagement. The local chief executives of the health system will exercise leadership in identifying and ensuring the participation of major stakeholders in all levels of planning and implementation of rationalization.
Activities to ensure stakeholder buy-in and commitment to the Plan may include a stakeholder analysis, stakeholder consultations, and public hearings.

2. Stakeholder analysis. This may be done to gauge the power of major stakeholders to influence policy as well as their levels of support and opposition. The stakeholders include all individuals or institutions who will be affected by change or reforms. .It may include Local Chief Executives, members of the concerned Sanggunian, Chiefs of Hospitals, Municipal Health Officers, representatives from Department of Health, PhilHealth, Non-Government Organizations (NGO), People’s Organizations (PO), the community, private health sector, foreign assistance agencies, etc. This will help health managers and implementers develop and implement strategic communication, advocacy and negotiation plans or to hold consensus-building workshops.

3. Stakeholder consultations. This may be conducted during the development of the Plan. This will provide the venue for organized groups to provide their inputs and concerns that will be used in the Health care, needs assessment and in the formulation of strategies and action plans. This will also allow planners to integrate the views of the ultimate beneficiaries of rationalization, including the marginalized sector, in every stage of planning.
4. Public hearings. This may be done during regular community meetings to elicit the views of the broader public on issues that will directly affect them. This will also allow the policymakers and planners to validate the results of the health care needs assessment and to test public acceptance of the proposed strategies and action plans.
These public hearings should be sufficiently publicized to maximize community participation.
5. The processes, results, and agreements reached during these consultations must be adequately documented and acknowledged by all involved stakeholders and must form part of the Plan.
VIII. Implementing Procedure
1. Health Systems or ILHZs that wish to Rationalize their Health Care Delivery System based on need may request for technical assistance from the DOH Centers for Health Development (CHD), for guidance on the process Specific procedures and standards shall be developed by DOH with stakeholders.

2. The draft of the Strategic Plan developed for the health system shall be the basis for negotiations between stakeholders in the health system and DOH, with regard to compliance to DOH benchmarks set. In case of modifications made to DOH benchmarks, negotiations and agreements between both parties shall be guided by national and local outcomes desired for rationalization.

3. The Strategic Plan shall be institutionalized in all health plans of stakeholders in the health system (public or private sector).
V. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DOH CENTRAL OFFICES
AND CHDs
a. DOH Centers for Health Development. They shall be responsible in the implementation of this AO, providing technical assistance, and monitoring health care delivery systems in their coverage area. They shall submit Annual Accomplishment Reports to the Field Implementation Coordinating Office (FICO).
10 b. Field Implementation and Coordination Office (FICO).

They shall provide oversight functions which include monitoring and evaluation with the CHDs and development of an Annual Situationer of
Health Care Delivery System in their area. They shall collect and act on all issues and concerns related to the implementation of this AO and shall request for amendments when necessary. They shall be responsible for addressing appeals on LGU strategic Plans and DOH Benchmarks, in the process of negotiations with health sector partners that seek to rationalize their health care delivery systems
 In order to ensure effective technical assistance to health systems that seek to rationalize their health care delivery system, the following Bureaus and Offices of the DOH Central Office shall assume the following roles and responsibilities

a. National Center for Health Facility Development. They shall provide the technical assistance in developing the rationalization of health care facilities. In partnership with NCDPC, BLHD, BHFS, they shall develop national plans and standards, advocacy tools, monitoring and evaluation  tools, technical assistance packages, training modules and regular training programs for CHDs, LGUs and other stakeholders. They shall create technical working groups or other such committees for special tasks as need requires.

b. National Center for Disease Prevention and Control. They shall provide technical assistance in developing the rationalization of public health delivery services. In partnership with the NCHFD, BLHD and BHFS, they shall develop national plans and standards, advocacy tools, monitoring and evaluation tools, technical assistance packages, training modules and regular training programs for CHDs, LGUs and other stakeholders. They shall create technical working groups or other such committees for special tasks as need requires.

c. Bureau of Local Health Development (BLHD) They Shall ensure institutionalization of objectives of rationalization in local health system policies. In coordination with NCHFD, NCDPC and BHFS, they shall develop national plans and standards, technical assistance packages, training modules and regular training, for CHDs, LGUs and other stakeholders,. They shall create technical working groups or other such committees for special tasks as need requires.

d. Bureau of Health Facilities and Services. They shall develop regulatory standards for health facilities consistent with rationalization. They shall assess compliance of health facilities to regulatory standards. In partnership with NCDPC, BLHD, NCHFD, they shall develop national plans and standards, advocacy tools, monitoring and evaluation tools, technical assistance packages, training modules and regular training programs for CHDs, LGUs and other stakeholders. They shall create technical working groups or other such committees for special tasks as need requires.

11 VI. REPEALING/ SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
A11 administrative orders, rules or regulation inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly. In the event that any provision or part of this Order be declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective.
VII. EFFECTIYITY 
This Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


Annex A

RATIONALIZATION OF HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM BASED ON
HEALTH NEEDS

INDICATORS:

1. Health outcomes

1.1 Maternal health indicators

1.2 Child health indicators

1.3 TB indicators

1.4 Environmental indicators

1.5 Total costs: A

1.5.1 maternal health
1.5.2 child health
1.5.3 TB and
1.5.4 environmental health programs
2. Non-health outcomes
p 2.1 Rural Health Unit/Health Center and other health facilities based on health needs (includes Birthing Homes, Barangay Health Stations)

2.1.1 One RHU/HC per 10,000-30,000 population

2.1.2 Patient mix indicates growth in primary health care cases requiring medical service and advance diagnostic services (sentinel diseases: uncomplicated hypertension, uncomplicated diabetes, uncomplicated heart disease, uncomplicated COPD, uncomplicated trauma)

2.1.3 Available doctor holding convenient compensated clinic hours (either MHO or private contractual MD with “no self-referral” rule)

2.1.4 Basic curative (includes emergency and minor surgical) services

2.2 Hospitals

2.2.1 1 bed per 1000 population

2.2.2 Travel time - at least one hour away from the nearest hospital by the routinely used means of transportation by most patients for at least 10 out of 12 months of the year

2.2.3 Profile of 10 most frequently admitted cases indicates growth in diseases or conditions requiring secondary or tertiary care (sentinel diseases: complicated cardiovascular, neurologic, pulmonary, endocrine disorders; complicated trauma, etc).

2.2.4 Universal PHIC enrollment (formal, informal, supported indigent population) in the province of at least 85% of the total population. At least 90% of the total indigent population enrolled in PHIC.

2.2.5 All hospitals are licensed by DOH and accredited by PHIC.

2.2.6 Yearly growth in average occupancy rates to 80-85% of authorized bed capacity (correlated with patient profile)

2.2.7 Average cost of hospitalization/per patient (per day?) for hospitals approximates or is lower than current national average.

2.2.8 Functional referral network of hospitals with the following:

2.2.8.1 At least one Level III of Level IV government hospital in the province to serve as referral facility for lower level facilities.

2.2.8.2 At least Level II category for district hospitals

</body>
