Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. No. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-95-02, 711-95-03; Telefax No. (632) 743-18-29

   
<date>11/09/2007</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2007-0037</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: CREATION OF THE NATIONAL STEERING COMMITTEE FOR HEALTH (NSCH)</subject>


<body>

To address the current challenges in the health sector, the national government, through the Department of Health (DOH), is implementing strategic and comprehensive reforms. As embodied in the FOURmula ONE (F1) for Health, these reforms are focused on the areas of health financing, health regulation, health service delivery and governance. All these are geared towards attaining better health outcomes, financial risk protection and more responsive health system for everyone. The integrated and sustained implementation of all these reform strategies require adherence to this common strategic framework and coordination of efforts among actors and stakeholders under the stewardship of the DOH through the undersigned (Executive Order 521, Sec 2).

In this light, it is imperative that a National Steering Committee for Health (NSCH) under the framework of Sector Development Approach for Health (SDAH) be created to assist DOH in its steering role. The NSCH shall be composed of the following:

Chairperson: Secretary of the Department of Health
Vice —Chairperson: Secretary of the Department of Interior and Local Government
Members:
Secretary of the Department of Budget and Management
Director General of the National Economic and Development Authority
President and Chief Executive Officer of Philippine Health Insurance Corporation
President, League of Provinces of the Philippines
President, League of Municipalities of the Philippines
President, League of Cities of the Philippines
One (1) representative from a Non-Government Organization
One (1) representative from a private sector/professional organization
World Health Organization Country representative (as a representative of development partners)

When appropriate and necessary, key partners and stakeholders from other National Government Agencies (NGAs), development partners, private sectors and civic groups shall be invited to the NSCH as observers.

The primary function of the NSCH is to act as the overall coordinating body to oversee and ensure adherence by all concerned stakeholders to a comprehensive, integrated and strategic policy framework and plan for health. In particular, the NSCH shall perform the following speciﬁc functions:

1) Provide strategic directions to enhance implementation of health reform policies and strategies.

2) Strengthen partnership among stakeholders particularly the Local Government Units (LGUs), concerned NGAs, NGOs, private sectors and civic groups under the SDAH framework;

3) Mobilize resources to implement and institutionalize critical programs, projects and activities both at the national and local levels as embodied in their respective Investment Plans; with the end-view of further enhancing local government capability, responsibility and accountability relative to the delivery of basic health services ;

4) Assess and evaluate overall progress of implementation as well as the performance of stakeholders

5) Perform other functions as may be deemed necessary by the NSCH Chairperson.

A Secretariat shall be organized to provide support to the NSCH with the following composition:

Lead: Undersecretary or Assistant Secretary of Health
Members:
Representatives from:
Department of Health
Department of Interior and Local Government

The Secretariat shall be in charge of providing the necessary technical inputs and doing complete staff work regarding the implementation of health reform strategies. The Secretariat shall also ensure that the NSCH meets regularly and acts on policy issues and related concerns.

The NSCH shall meet on a bi-annual basis or as need arises.

Expenses incurred in the accomplishment of the tasks shall be charged against the funds of the DOH Office of the Secretary subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

 
</body>
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>