Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

Bldg. # 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Tel. # (632)— 743—8301 locals 1107/1125; 711—9502; 711-9503
URL: http://www.doh.gov.ph
E-mail: osec@doh.gov.ph

   

<date>11/15/2007</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2007-0038</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Adoptinq the Sector Development Approach for Health (SDAH) in the Implementation of FOURmuIaOne (F1) for Health</subject>


<body>

I. Background and Rationale

The Philippines has progressed towards realizing its health goals in the past decades. Despite the inroads made, however, a number of gaps remain to be filled, and vital health indices have not been reduced to acceptable levels. Social and economic changes have created new challenges in terms of degenerative and lifestyle diseases. Further, the organization of the health sector itself suffers from inappropriate delivery system, inadequate regulatory mechanisms, and inequitable health care financing schemes.

Building on the Health Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA), the Department of Health (DOH) adopted FOURmula One for Health (F1) in 2005 as the implementing framework for health sector reform. The F1 is designed to undertake critical reforms with speed, precision and effective coordination directed at improving the efficiency, effectiveness and equity of the health system in a manner that is felt and appreciated by Filipinos, especially the poor. The reforms will contribute to the national goals of (i) improved health outcomes, (ii) increased financial protection for the poor from the costs of poor health, and (iii) increased responsiveness of the health system.

The DOH recognizes that to achieve these goals there is a need to coordinate support among the different stakeholders and partners towards a unified health sector policy and particularly in a devolved setting. Invoking the authority of the Secretary of Health to steer health sector reform throughout the country as provided by Executive Order 521 of 2002, the DOH started the sector-wide approach (SWAp) as the management approach to make genuine health sector reforms happen. The SWAp aims to bring about an environment where all significant funding for the sector supports the sector policy and expenditure program. This will reduce fragmentation of support of partners and increase impact on health sector development.

The SWAp process shall be guided by the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and shall be anchored on government ownership, harmonization of processes, alignment, managing for results, and mutual accountability. The Paris Declaration has been formally adopted at a High Level International Forum in Paris in 2005, and has been signed by all donors and developing countries including the Philippines. The DOH recognizes that the SWAp is a process and that internalization and application of the principles of the Declaration will be gradual.

The DOH formally adopts the sector—wide approach as the means to manage the implementation of F1 under this Order. In the Philippines, the SWAp shall be known as the Sector Development Approach for Health (SDAH). This issuance provides the policy framework for SDAH and specifies the goals, general principles, guidelines, and implementation arrangements for its effective implementation.

II. Scope and Coverage

The policy encompasses the operation of all agencies involved in the Health Sector mainly the Department of Health and its attached agencies like the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation and the Commission on Population. It also covers the operation of various national agencies and departments (Department of Budget and Management, Department of Education, Department of Finance, among others); and those of local governments at province, city, and municipal levels in so far as these agencies” and Local Government Units (LGUs) operations involve the health sector reforms. It further covers official development assistance (ODA) and partnership with the private sector; civil society and other stakeholders as they engage in health sector reform implementation.

III. Objectives of SDAH

A. General Objective

To enhance government leadership in managing the health sector and implementing health reforms.

B. Specific Objectives

1. To improve the quality and efficiency of mobilization and utilization of ODA and other investments for F1 and harmonizing these with nationalllocal investments.

2. To ensure sustainability of health reforms.

IV. General Principles

A. The SDAH process shall be led by the national government through the Department of Health.

The DOH shall provide leadership and take ownership of the SDAH process.

It shall take into account the roles of local units as owners of local program implementation, the DOH as policymaker and monitor, and other national government agencies as oversight for their respective areas (e.g. Department of Budget and Management and Department of Finance in public finance management).

B. The SDAH shall be guided by the health sector goals and strategies.

The primary goals as set forth in the National Objectives for Health, the Millennium Development Goals, and the Medium-Term Philippine Development Plan which are better health outcomes, more responsive health system, more equitable health financing, shall be the guideposts for SDAH. The health sector reform with F1 as the implementing framework shall be the basis for common grounds for collaboration, both at the national and local levels.

C. SDAH stakeholders and partners shall use common approaches, including but not limited to common expenditure framework, a common monitoring and evaluation framework and system, and harmonized procedures.

1. Sector Financing Framework

SDAH shall support and utilize the Health Sector Expenditure Framework (HSEF), a multi—year expenditure framework for the health sector reform program. The HSEF is guided by the financing principle that national subsidies for health should be allocated among service delivery, financing, regulations and governance on the basis of (1) incremental influence over health sector performance; and (2) capacity to generate revenues from operations.

2. Monitoring and Evaluation for Equity and Effectiveness (ME3)

The SDAH shall use a common monitoring and evaluation (ME) framework and system, to measure how F1 has helped attain the goals and results that need to be achieved. As reforms are instituted to help achieve health goals faster and better for the poor, the ME frame for F1 shall measure how reforms have equitably and effectively achieved goals in the health systems, Le. hdw reforms have improved health outcomes for the poor (equity) and how reforms have achieved goals in the health systems (effectiveness).

The ME3 shall provide information to stakeholders for outcomes for which they are accountable for.

3. Harmonized Technical Assistance (TA) Processes and Procedures

SDAH shall progress towards development of systems and procedures in TA coordination and utilizing government procedures in public finance whenever possible.

4. Coordination of available resources

The SDAH shall aim for efficient use of resources from national, local, external, private sector, civil society, and other sources through several options.

V. General Guidelines

In accordance with the above principles, the DOH and SDAH partners shall undertake the following:

A. Strengthen the leadership, coordination, management and planning capabilities at the national and local government levels

The DOH shall direct the implementation of health reforms using strategic guideposts in developing leadership, coordination, and change management mechanisms at the national, regional and local levels. Effective planning and management capabilities shall be the foundation of successful implementation of health reforms.

B. Strengthen financial systems and accountability at the national and local levels

The DOH and SDAH partners shall aim to establish funding and financing systems and procedures both at national and local government levels towards more efficient and effective use of funds in the implementation of reforms.

C. Establish an effective mechanism to stimulate LGU participation

The DOH and SDAH partners shall stimulate LGU participation to adopt F1 and national priorities in their respective localities such as advocacy on the economic and socio—political advantages of instituting health reforms, provision of incentives, and forging performance-based agreements between the national and local governments among others.

D. Establish mechanisms forjoint processes and drawing up of instruments for dialogue and consensus building among partners

The DOH Arrangements shall be set to perform joint planning, assessment, and reviews of the implementation of the health reform program and technical assistance. These joint processes shall aim to enable mutual accountability between government and its partners. The complementary structures shall be put in place and terms of reference shall be defined to perform the joint processes.

SDAH Code of Conduct, agreements, and other necessary instruments shall be drawn up to set forth among partners accountability of the government and development partners to the principles of SDAH.

VI. Implementation Arrangements

A. The DOH Sectoral Management and Coordination Office (SMCO), through the Bureau of International Health Cooperation (BIHC), shall lead the SDAH process. It shall set the mechanisms and structures for collaboration, in consensus with all partners. Among others, it shall manage the following:

1. Joint review of sectoral plans at national and local levels
2. Joint planning and assessment
3. Pooling and/or coordination of funds available to the health sector
4. Coordination of technical assistance and other non—monetary resources for the health sector

B. The SMCO, through the BIHC, shall initiate the crafting of SDAH Code of Conduct among SDAH partners, and other necessary SDAH instruments.

C. The BIHC shall act as the technical secretariat in matters pertaining to SDAH.

VII. Repealing Clause

The provisions of previous Orders and other related issuances inconsistent or contrary with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby revised, modified, repealed or rescinded accordingly. All other provisions of existing issuances which are not affected by this Order shall remain valid and in effect.

VIII. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.

  
</body>
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>