Republic 0fthe Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
2/F Building 11 San Lazaro Compound, Ftizal Avenue, StaCruz, Manila
Trunk Line: 743-8301; Direct Line: 711-9501; Fax: 743-1829;743—1786
URL: http://www.doh.gov.ph; e-mail: osec@doh.gov.ph

   
<date>10/19/2007</date>   
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2007 - 0035</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Policv and Guidelines governing the Pilot Testing of the Common Submission Dossier Template as Technical Requirements for the Registration of Medical Devices.</subject>


<body>

Rationale:

The ASEAN Consultative Committee for Standards and Quality (ACCSQ) was formed by the ASEAN Economic Minister in 1992 whose main objective is to minimize if not totally remove the technical barriers to trade in order to facilitate the implementation of the Common Effective Preferential Tariff (CEPT) Agreement to realize the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA).

In 1997, during the 4th Senior Economic Ofﬁcials Meeting (SEOM) held in Medan, Indonesia. the SEOM authorized the ACCSQ to involve regulatory bodies in order to achieve its mandate of eliminating technical barrier to trade. During the 24th ACCSQ Meeting on August 2004. a proposal was made to form a Product Working Group for medical device to implement specific measures on medical device regulation under the roadmap for healthcare integration. The ACCSQ—Medical Device Product Working Group (MDPWG) proposal was approved by the SEOM 1/36 January 2005 in Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

One of the measures to eliminate the technical barriers to trade that will be implemented by the ASEAN member countries is the common submission dossier template (CSDT) for product approval in the ASEAN. In 2006, the final draft of the CSDT was approved in the ACCSQ-MDPWG Meeting and initial pilot testing was conducted by 4 member countries. During the August 2007 meeting held in Vietnam. it was decided to pilot test the implementation ofthe CSDT in all member countries.

Purpose and Objective

The purpose ofthis Order is to pilot test the Common Submission Dossier Template for the registration of medical devices that will be used in the implementation of the harmonized technical requirements among the ASEAN member countries.

Scope

All categories of medical devices establishments and the different classifications of medical devices shall be represented in the conduct ofthe pilot testing ofthe CSDT.

Policies

1. The BHDT shall determine the industries that will be invited to participate in the CSDT pilot test.

2. The BHDT shall ensure that all categories of medical devices establishment are represented.

3. The BHDT shall ensure that different classifications of medical devices are included in the CSDT pilot test.

Classiﬁcation of Medical Devices

The classification system of medical devices in this Administrative Order shall follow the classiﬁcation system of the Global Harmonization Task Force (GHTF). However, the classification to be used as agreed by the ACCSQ—MDPWG will be Class 1, 2, 3 and 4 instead of Class A, B, C, D.

Implementing Guidelines:

1. The existing application form for the registration of medical devices shall be used.
2. Participating company shall be allowed to submit only one application under the CSDT pilot test. However, in the event that the classifications of medical devices are not well represented. the BHDT shall enjoin the participating companies to submit another application.
3. Registration fee for the application covered by the CSDT pilot test shall be waived. The definition and classification of medical devices shall be governed by the GHTF final directives. Please refer to annex I and annex 2
4. All the legal requirements shall be the same as the existing legal requirements for the regulation of medical devices.
5. The technical requirements shall be guided by the guidance document issued by the ACCSQ — Medical Device Product Working Group entitled “ACCSQ—MDPWG—Guidance For Common Submission Dossier Template (Versiono). Chiangmai, Thailand. I4 — 16 Feb 2006” attached as Annex A.
6. The detailed checklist of technical requirements for each category of medical devices based on the CSDT is attached as Annexes B. C. D and E.
7. The processing ofthe CPR shall be based on the existing policy under Administrative Order No. 2007—0003: Policies and Guidelines governing the Registration and Licensing of Establishments dealing with Medical Devices.
8. The Certificate of Product Registration shall only be issued upon compliance with the existing legal requirements and the technical requirements under CSDT.

Effectivity

This order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, M.D., M.Sc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

<body>
ANNEX A

ASEAN Consultative Committee for Standards and Quality Medical Device Product Working Group (ACCSQ-MDPWG)

Document Number: ACCSQ-MDPWG/Guide6 Draft2 (16 Feb 2006)
Date: 16 Feb 2006
Document Name: AC CSQ-MDPWG-Guidance For Common Submission Dossier Template (Version6), Chiangmai, Thailand, 14 — 16 Feb 2006

1.0 Introduction

The document is intended to provide guidance for submission of device information to the regulatory authorities; structured in the format of one common template acceptable by all ASEAN regulators. It is envisaged that a Common Submission Dossier Template (CSDT) will harmonize the differences in documentation formats that presently exist in different ASEAN jurisdictions. The adoption of this guidance document in ASEAN will eiiminate the preparation of multiple dossiers, arranged in different formats but with essentially the same contents, for regulatory submission to different regulatory authorities.

2.0 Scope

This guidance document describes the format for an ASEAN harmonized common submission dossier template and provides general recommendation on the content of the formatted elements. This document does not recommend any new or additional technical documents above and beyond What should be created by the manufacturer to comply with existing requirements to demonstrate conformity to the Essential Principles [GHTF SGt/NO41], and to address any country-specific requirements. 

This document applies to all products that fall within the definition of a medical device.

Essentially, the CSDT contains elements of the Summary Technical Documentation (STED) [GHTF SGl/N041]2 for demonstrating conformity to the Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices.

The format of the CSDT recommended herein is based upon the goal of both regulators and
manufacturers to strive for the least burdensome means to demonstrate conformity to the Essential

Principles for all ciasses of medical devices.

Requirements for post—market vigilance or adverse event reporting are outside the scope of this

document.

 

l ACCSQ MDPWG 2ml Meeting. Jakarta. Indonesia. I 1-12 July 2005

2 Text in italics in this document are similar to those in the G] ITF S'l‘lfl.) Document

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 2 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

as Essentiva Summary

An executive summary shall be provided with the common submission dossier template, which shall

include the following information:

c an overview, e.g., introductory descriptive information on the medical device, the intended uses
and indicatioits for use of the medical device, any novel features and a synopsis of the content
of the CSDT; I

0 commercial marketing history;

0 intended uses and indications in labelling;

0 status of any pending request for market clearance; and

. important safety/performance related information.

eat-ti Eiements of the Common Submission Bossier ”temptate
4.1 Relevant Essential Principles and Method Used to Demonstrate Conformity

The CSDT should identify the Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices that
are applicable to the device. The CSDT should identify the general method used to demonstrate
conformity to each applicable Essential Principle. The methods that may be used include compliance
with recognized or other standards, state of the art or internal industry methods, comparisons to other

similar marketed devices, etc.

The CSDT should identify the specific documents related to the method used to demonstrate conformity
to the Essential Principles.

nu

4.1.1 Essential Principles and Evidence of Conformity

The evidence of conformity can be provided in tabular form with supporting documentation available for

review as required. A sample of the essential principles conformity checklist is included in Appendix A.

For example, a completed Essential Principles conformity checklist can be used to demonstrate that a
recognized test standard was used as part of the method to demonstrate conformity to one Essential
Principle. As such, CSDT would then include a declaration of conformity to the standard, or other
certification permitted by the Regulatory Authority, and a summary of the test data, ifthe standard does

not include performance requirements. When the manufacturer uses international or other standards to

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 3 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

demonstrate conformity with the Essential Principles, the CSDT should identify the full title of the
standard, identifying numbers, date of the standard, and the organization that created the standard.
When the manufacturer uses other means, such as internal standards, the CSDT should describe the

means.
Not all the essential principles will apply to all devices and it is for the manufacturer of the device to
assess which are appropriate for his particular device product. in determining this, account must be

taken of the intended purpose of the device.

4.2 Device Description (According to GHTF Classification)

 

Description

 

i Device Description

 

Intended Use/Indications for Use

 

Product Drawing/Product Brochure

Material/Component List

 

 

Statement on Shelf Life (Sterile Product only)

 

 

 

4.2.1 Device description & features

Besides a general description of the device, a more detailed description of the device attributes is
necessary to explain how the device functions, the basic scientific concepts that form the fundamentals
for the device, the component materials and accessories used in its principles of operation as well as
packaging. A complete description of each functional component, material or ingredient of the device
should be provided, with labelled pictorial representation of the device in the form of diagrams,

photographs or drawings, as appropriate.

4.2.2 Intended use .

This means the use for which the medical device is intended, forwhich it is suited according to the data

supplied by the manufacturer in the instructions as well as the functional capability of the device.

4.2.3 Indications
This is a general description of the disease or condition that the device will diagnose, treat, prevent,

cure or mitigate and includes a description of the target patient population for which the device is

intended.

4.2.4 Instructions of use

These are all necessary information from the manufacturer including the procedures, methods,

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 4 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

frequency, duration, quantity and preparation to be followed for safe use of the medical device.
Instructions needed to use the device in a safe manner shall, to the extent possible, be included on the

device itself and/or on its packaging by other formats I forms.

4.2.5 Contraindications

This is a general description of the disease or condition and the patient population for which the device
should not be used for the purpose of diagnosing, treating, curing or mitigating. Contraindications are
conditions under which the device should not be used because the risk of use clearly outweighs any

possible benefit.

4.2.6 Warnings

This is the specific hazard alert information that a user needs to know before using the device.

4.2.7 Precautions

This alerts the user to exercise special care necessary for the safe and effective use of the device.
They may include actions to be taken to avoid effects on patients/users that may not be potentially
life-threatening or result in serious injury, but about which the user should be aware. Precautions may
also alert the user to adverse effects on the device of use or misuse and the care necessary to avoid

such effects.

4.2.8 Potential adverse effects
These are potential undesirable and serious outcomes (death, injury, or serious adverse events) to the

patient/user, or side effects from the use of the medical device, under normal conditions.

4.2.9 Alternative therapy
This is a description of any alternative practices or procedures for diagnosing, treating, curing or

mitigating the disease or condition for which the device is intended.

4.2.10 Materials
A description of the materials of the device and their physical properties to the extent necessary to
demonstrate conformity with the relevant Essential Principles. The information shall include complete

chemical, biological and physical characterization ofthe materials ofthe device.

4.2.11 Other Relevant Specifications
The functional characteristics and technical performance specifications for the device including, as
relevant, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity of measuring and diagnostic devices, reliability and other

factors; and other specifications including chemical, physical, electrical, mechanical, biological,

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 5 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

software, sterility, stability, storage and transport, and packaging to the extent necessary to demonstrate

conformity with the relevant Essential Principles.

4.2.12 Other Descriptive Information
Other important descriptive characteristics not detailed above, to the extent necessary to demonstrate
conformity with the relevant Essential Principles (for example, the biocompatibility category for the

finished device).

NOTE: For simple, low risk devices, the above information will typically be contained in already

existing sales brochures, instructions for use, etc.
4.3 Summary of Design Verification and Validation Documents

This section should summarize or reference or contain design verification and design validation data to

the extent appropriate to the complexity and risk class of the device:

Such documentation should typically include:
. declarations/certificates of conformity to the “recognized” standards listed as applied by the
manufacturer; and/or
. summaries or reports of tests and evaluations based on other standards, manufacturer

methods and tests, or alternative ways of demonstrating compliance.

EXAMPLE: The completed Table of Conformity to the Essential Principles that a recognized test
standard was used as part of the method to demonstrate conformity to one Essential Principle.
Section 3.0 of the CSTD would then include a declaration of conformity to the standard, or other
certification permitted by the relevant Regulatory Authority, and a summary of the test data, if the

standard does not include performance requirements.

The data summaries or tests reports and evaluations would typically cover, as appropriate to the

complexity and risk class of the device:

. a listing of and conclusions drawn from published reports that concern the safety and
performance of aspects of the device with reference to the Essential Principles;

0 engineering tests;

. laboratory tests;

0 biocompatibility tests;

. animal tests;

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 6 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

. simulated use;

0 software validation.

4.3.1 Pre—clinical Studies

Details must be provided on all biocompatibility tests conducted on materials used in a device. At a
minimum, tests must be conducted on samples from the finished, sterilized device. All materials that are
significantly different’must be characterized. Information describing the tests, the results and the

analyses of data must be presented.

Complete pre-clinical physical test data must be provided, as appropriate. The report must include the
objectives, methodology, results and manufacturer's conclusions of all physical studies of the device
and its components. Physical testing must be conducted to predict the adequacy of device response to
physiological stresses, undesirable conditions and forces, long-term use and all known and possible

failure modes.

Pre—clinical animal studies used to support the probability of effectiveness in humans must be reported.
These studies must be undertaken using good laboratory practices. The objectives, methodology,
results, analysis and manufacture's conclusions must be presented. The study conclusion should
address the device's interactions with animal fluids and tissues and the functional effectiveness of the
device in the experimental animal model(s). The rationale (and limitations) of selecting the particular

animal model should be discussed.

4.3.1.1 Software Validation Studies (if applicable)

The correctness of a software product is another critical product characteristic that cannot be fully
verified in a finished product. The manufacturer and/or device sponsor must provide evidence that
validates the software design and development process. This information should include the results of
all verification, validation and testing performed in-house and in a user's environment prior to final
release, for all of the different hardware configurations identified in the labelling, as well as

representative data generated from both testing environments.

4.3.1.2 Devices Containing Biological Material

Results of studies substantiating the adequacy of the measures taken with regards to the risks
associated with transmissible agents must be provided. This will include viral clearance results for
known hazards. Donor screening concerns must be fully addressed and methods of harvesting must
also be fully described. Process validation results are required to substantiate that manufacturing

procedures are in place to minimize biological risks.

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 7 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

4.3.2 Clinical Evidence

This section should indicate how any applicable requirements of the Essential Principles for clinical
evaluation of the device have been met. Where applicable, this evaluation may take the form of a
systematic review of existing bibliography, clinical experience with the same or similar devices, or by
clinical investigation. Clinical investigation is most likely to be needed for higher risk class devices, or

for devices where theirs is little or no clinical experience.

4.3.2.1 Use of Existing Bibliography

Copies are required of all literature studies, or existing bibliography, that the manufacturer is using to
support safety and effectiveness. These will be a subset of the bibliography of references. General
bibliographic references should be device—specific as supplied in chronological order. Care should be

taken to ensure that the references are timely and relevant to the current application.

Clinical evidence of effectiveness may comprise device-related investigations conducted domestically
or other countries. It may be derived from relevant publications in a peer-reviewed scientific literature.
The documented evidence submitted should include the objectives, methodology and results presented
in context, clearly and meaningfully. The conclusions on the outcome of the clinical studies should be

preceded by a discussion in context with the published literature.
4.4 Device Labelling

This is the descriptive and informational product literature that accompanies the device any time while it
is held for sale or shipped, such as any physician's manuals, pack labeling, promotional material and
product brochures etc. This section should summarize or reference or contain the following labelling
data to the extent appropriate to the complexity and risk class of the device, which is generally

considered as “labelling”:

0 Sample of labels on the device and its packaging

0 Instructions for use

0 Other literature or training materials

0 Instructions for installation and maintenance (if applicable).

0 Any information and instructions given to the patient, including instructions for any procedure

the patient is expected to perform (if applicable).

4.4.1 Samples of Labels on the Device and its Packaging

This is the printed, written or graphic product information provided on or attached to one or more levels

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 8 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

of packaging, including the outer packaging or the outside containerwrapper. Any pack labelling, which

is not provided on the outer packaging must be easily legible through this outer packaging.

If it is physically impossible to include samples of labels (e.g. large warning labels affixed onto an X-ray
machine), alternative submission methods (e.g. photographs or technical drawings), to the extent

appropriate, will suffice to meet the requirements of this section.

4.4.2 Instructions for Use, Training Materials & Instructions for Installation and

Maintenance

The instructions for use is commonly referred to as the physician's manual, user manual, operator's
manual, prescriber’s manual or reference manual. It contains directions under which the physician or
end-user can use a device safely and for its intended purpose. This should include information on
indications, contraindications, warnings, precautions, potential adverse effects, alternative therapy and
the conditions that should be managed during normal use to maintain the safety and effectiveness of
the device. Where applicable, this section should include instructions for training of the end-users for
competent use of the device for its intended purpose, as well as installation and maintenance of the

device.
4.5 Risk Analysis

This section should summarize or reference or contain the results of the risk analysis. This risk analysis
should be based upon international or other recognized standards, and be appropriate to the complexity

and risk class of the device.

4.5.1 Results of Risk Analysis

A list of possible hazards for these devices must be prepared. Indirect risks from medical devices may
result from device-associated hazards, such as moving parts, which lead to sustained injury, or from
user-related hazards, such as ionizing radiation from an X—ray machine. The evaluation of these risks
against the claimed benefits of the device and the method(s) used to reduce risk to acceptable levels
must be described. The individual or organization that carries out the risk analysis must be clearly
identified. The technique used to analyze risk must be specified, to ensure that it is appropriate for the

device and the risk involved.

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 9 of 12

ANNEX 14
Draft: Version 6 ACCSQ MDPWG
Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

4.6 Manufacturer Information

This section should summarize or reference or contain documentation related to the manufacturing
processes, including quality assurance measures, which is appropriate to the complexity and risk class

of the device.

4.6.1 Manufacturing Process
Manufacturing process for the device should be provided in the form of a list of resources and activities

that transform inputs into the desired output.

EXAMPLE: The manufacturing process should include the appropriate manufacturing methods and
procedures, manufacturing environment or condition, and the facilities and controls used for the
manufacturing, processing, packaging, labeling, storage of the device. Sufficient detail must be
provided to enable a person generally familiar with quality systems to judge the appropriateness of the

controls in place. A brief summary of the sterilization method and processing should be included, if any.

If multiple facilities are involved in the manufacture of device, the applicable information (e.g. quality
assurance certificates issued by an accredited third party inspection body) for each facility must be
submitted. Firms that manufacture or process the device under contract to the manufacturer may elect
to submit all or a portion of the manufacturing information applicable to their facility directly to the
Regulatory Authority in the form of a master file. The manufacturer should inform these contractors of
the need to supply detailed information on the device. However, it is not the intent of this section to
capture information relating to the supply of sub-components (i.e. unfinished medical device) that

contributes towards the manufacture ofthe finished device itself.

Rafe tenses _

SG1I N009 Labeling for Medical Devices

861/ N01 5 Medical Devices Classification

SG1INO29 Information Document Concerning the Definition of the Term ‘Medical Device’.

SG1INO41 Essential Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices (including In
Vitro Diagnostic Devices)

SG1INO43 Labeling for Medical Devices (including In Vitro Diagnostic Devices)

SG1INO11 R17 Summary Technical Documentation for Demonstrating Conformity to the Essential

Principles of Safety and Performance of Medical Devices (8 TED)

 

16 Feb 2006 Page 10 of 12

Draft: Version 6

ANNEX 14
ACCSQ MDPWG

Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

APPENDIX A - Example of an Essential Principles Conformity Checklist

 

Essential Principle

Applicable
to the

device ?

Method of Identity of
Conformity3 Speciﬁc

Documents

 

1. Medical devices should be designed and manufactured in such a way
that. when used under the conditions and for the purposes intended and.
where applicable, by virtue of the technical know-ledge, experience,
education or training of intended users, they will not compromise the
clinical condition or the safety of patients, or the safety and health of users
or- where applicable, other persons, provided that any risks which may be
associated with their use constitute acceptable risks when weighed against
the beneﬁts to the patient and are compatible with a high level of protection

of health and safety.

Yes

 

2. The solutions adopted by the manufacturer for the design and
construction of the device: should conform to safety principles. taking
account of the generally acknowledged state of the art. in selecting the most
appropriate solutions, the manufacturer should apply the following
principles in the following order:

0 identity hazards and the associated risks arising from the
intended use and foreseeable mi suse,

o eliminate or reduce risks as far as possible (inherently safe
design and construction),

0 where appropriate take adequate protection measures
including alarms if necessary. in relation to risks that
cannot be eliminated-

0 inform users of the residual risks due to any shortcomings

of the protection measures adopted.

v

 

’3

n. Devices should achieve the performance intended by the manufacturer
and be designed, manufactured and packaged in such a way that they are
suitable for one or more of the functions within the scope of the definition of

a medical device applicable in each jurisdiction.

 

 

4. The characteristics and performances referred to in Clauses I, 2 and 3
should not be adversely affected to such a degree that the clinical conditions
and safety of the patients and, where applicable. of other persons are

compromised during the lifetime of the device, as indicated by the

 

 

 

 

3

Select from: recognised standard/other international standard/national standard/company standard/validated testl etc.

 

16 Feb 2006

Page 11 of 12

 

Draft: Version 6

ANNEX 14
ACCSQ MDPWG

Draft: Common Submission Dossier Template

 

 

manufacturer. when the device is subjected to the stresses which can occur
during normal conditions of use and has been properly maintained in

accordance with the manufacturers instructions.

 

5. 'lhe devices should be designed, manufactured and packed in such a

way that their characteristics and performances during their intended use

will not be adversely affected during transport and storage taking account of
I

the instructions and information provided by the manufacturer.

 

6. The benefits must be determined to outweigh any undesirable

side-effects for the performances intended.

 

 

7. l. 'lhe devices should be designed and manufactured in such a way as to
ensure the characteristics and performance referred to in Section I of the
'General Requirements‘. Particular attention should be paid to:

o the choice of materials used, particularly as regards
toxicity and, where appropriate, tlammz-lbility,

o the compatibility between the materials used and
biological tissues, cells and body fluids, taking account of
the intended purpose of the device.

0 the choice of materials used should reflect, where
appropriate, matters such as hardness. wear and fatigue

strength.

 

7.2. The devices should be designed, manufactured and packed in such a
way as to minimise the risk posed by contaminants and residues to the
persons involved in the transport, storage and use of the devices and to the
patients, taking account of the intended purpose of the product. Particular
attention should be paid to the tissues exposed and to the duration and

frequency of exposure.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 “a lite
8 lite
9 Etc 7 _ ___ ____ _
16 Feb 2006 Page 12 of 12

 

ANNEX B

List of Requirements for the Notification of Medical Devices under Class |

(CSDT Pilot Test)

 

Notarized Application Form ﬁled in duplicate

 

Photocopy of the valid License to Operate in the Philippines issued by DOH

 

For distributors. Certificate of Agreement between the Manufacturer and Distributor
regarding the device;,for imported medical device. the Certiﬁcate shall be duly authenticated
by the territorial Philippine consulate

 

For imported medical devices. Certiﬁcate of Product Notiﬁcation or Certificate of Product
Registration or any equivalent document attesting to the safety and effectiveness of the device
issued by the regulatory agency in the country of origin or reference country and duly
authenticated by the territorial Philippine Consulate

 

Device description consisting of the following:

a. Intended use

b. Basic scientific concepts that form the fundamental of the device. if applicable

c. Component Material and accessories used in its principle of operation. if
applicable

(1. Technical Speciﬁcation

e. The variants of the device to be marketed including the parameters of the range of
variants. if applicable.

 

A description of the sterilization method and the packaging used. the sterility level and the
validation of the sterilization process. if applicable.

 

Certiﬁcate of Conformity to the aspect of manufacture relating to metrology for devices with
measuring functions

 

Declaration of Conformity (self declaration) with product standards. if applicable

 

Sample of labels on the device and its packaging and other labeling materials to be used for
the device that includes users or instruction manuals

Government certiﬁcate attesting to the status of the Manufacturer ‘5 competency and
reliability of the personnel and facilities or Quality Systems Certiﬁcate of approval or
compliance certiﬁcate with 180 9000 series or ISO 13485. For imported medical device the
Certiﬁcate shall be duly authenticated by the territorial Philippine Consulate

Stability studies of the product to justify claimed shelf -life. if applicable

 

Picture of the product and representative sample or commercial presentation of the product .
when needed

 

 

 

J

ANNEX C
Checklist of Requirements for the Registration of Medical Devices under
Class II (CSDT Pilot Test)

 

REQUIREMENTS

 

Notarized Application Form ﬁled in duplicate

Photocopy of the valid License to Operate in the Philippines issued by DOH

 

For distributors. Certiﬁcate of Agreement between the Manufacturer and Distributor regarding the
device: for i1nported.mcdical device. the Certiﬁcate shall be duly authenticated by the territorial ;
Philippine consulate :

 

For imported medical devices- Certiﬁcate of Product Notification or Certificate of Product
Registration or any equivalent document attesting to the safety and effectiveness of the device issued 9
by the regulatory agency in the country of origin and duly authenticated by the territorial Philippine
Consulate

 

Executive Summary to include a brief introductory descriptive information on the medical device.
intended use and indications for use any novel feature and a synopsis of the content of the C SDT. f
commercial marketing history. status of any pending request for market clearance and important j
safety/performance related information. ‘

 

Device description consisting of the following:

Intended use

n-v
oi

b. indications of use and Contraindications

c. Basic scientific concepts that form the fundamental of the device, if applicable

d. Component Material and accessories used in its principle of operation, if applicable

e. 'l‘echnical Speciﬁcations to include the following: :
e.l The functional characteristics and technical performance speciﬁcations of the device including
where relevant: accuracy, sensitivity, reliability and other factors
e2 Other speciﬁcations including chemical, physical, electrical, mechanical, biological, software,
sterility, stability, storage and transport, and packaging, whichever is applicable. :

f. Any warnings and/or precautions

g. Principles of operation, if applicable
h. Explanation of any novel features, ifapplicable
i. List of the accessories and other devices which are intended to be used in combination of the device, if

applicable. .
j. The variants of the device to be marketed including the parameters of the range of variants. if ;
applicable. "

k. General description of each of the functional parts or components of the device with labeled pictorial
representations (such as, diagrams, photographs, drawings) clearly indicating each part, with sufficient
explanation to understand the drawings and diagrams, if applicable. ‘

1. A description of the materials of the device and their physical properties to the extent necessary to
demonstrate conformity with safety and effectiveness, ifapplicable.

 

 

Design Verification/ Validation documents consisting of the following:

a. Certiﬁcate of Conformity to the aspect of manufacture relating to metrology for devices with measuring
functions.

b. l_)eclaration ofConformity with product standards, if applicable

c. Summaries or reports of tests and evaluation to cover engineering test, laboratory test, stability studies -
to justify the claimed shelf life, simulated use and other tests, whichever is applicable

 

 

Clinical evidence for the following. if applicable:

a. Newly introduced device
l.)evices incorporating new materials coming into contact with the patient.

e. Existing materials applied in a body part not previously exposed to that material, and for which no
prior chemical experience exists.

d. An existing device that is modiﬁed and the modification might affect safety and efﬁectiveness.

 

Sample of labels on the device and its packaging and other labeling materials to be used for the device .
that includes users or instruction manuals '

5

Risk assessment consisting of risk analysis. evaluation and reduction measures. if applicable.

 

Manufacturer information to include the following:

a. Quality Systems Certificate of approval on Manulaeturing or compliance certificate with ISO 9000 ;
series or 180 13485. For imported medical device the Certificate shall be duly authenticated by the
territorial Philippine Consulate.

b. Methods/procedures/ controls used in the Quality Assurance.

.0

A description of the sterilization method and the packaging used, the sterility level and the g
validation ofthe sterilization process, if applicable.

Picture of the product and representative sample or commercial presentation of the product. when
needed

 

 

Declaration of Conformity to acceptable standards.

 

Page 2 of requirements for Class H

U]

ANNEX D

Checklist of Requirements for the Registration of Medical Devices under Class

III (csor Pilot Test)

 

REQUIREMENTS

 

Notarized Application Form filed in duplicate

Photocopy of the valid License to Operate in the Philippines issued by DOH

 

For distributors- Certificate of Agreement between the Manufacturer and Distributor regarding the
device; for importeddnedical device. the Certificate shall be duly authenticated by the territorial
Philippine consulate

 

For imported medical devices. Certificate of Product Notification or Certificate of Product
Registration or any equivalent document attesting to the safety and effectiveness of the device issued
by the regulatory agency in the country of origin or reference country and duly authenticated by the
territorial Philippine Consulate

 

Executive Summary to include a brief introductory descriptive information on the medical device.
intended use and indications for use any novel feature and a synopsis of the content of the CSDT-
commercial marketing history. status of any pending request for market clearance and important
safety/performance related information.

 

Device description consisting of the following:
a. Intended use

b. indications of use and Contraindications
c. Basic scientific concepts that form the fundamental of the device, if applicable
d. Component Material and accessories used in its principle of operation, if applicable
e. Technical Specifications to include the tollowing:
i. 'lhe functional characteristics and technical performance specifications of the device
including where relevant: accuracy, sensitivity, reliability and other factors
ii. Other specifications including chemical, physical, electrical, mechanical- biological-
softy-vare, sterility, stability, storage and transport, and packaging, whichever is
applicable.
f. Any warnings and/or precautions
g. Principles of operation, if applicable
11. Explanation of any novel features, ifapplicable

List of the accessories and other devices which are intended to be used in combination of the

device, if applicable.

j. The variants of the device to be marketed including the parameters of the range of variants,
if applicable. '

k. General description of each of the functional parts or components of the device with labeled
pictorial representations (such as, diagrams, photographs, drawings) clearly indicating each
part, with sufficient explanation to understand the drawings and diagrams, if applicable.

1. A description of the materials of the device and their physical properties to the extent

necessary to demonstrate conformity with safety and effectiveness, if applicable.

p...- .

 

 

 

Design Veriﬁcation/Validation documents consisting of the following:

a. Certificate of Conformity to the aspect of manulacture relating to metrology for devices with
measuring lunctions.

b. Declaration ofConformity with product standards, if applicable

c. Summaries or reports of tests and evaluation to cover engineering test, laboratory test, stability
studies to justily the claimed shelf life, simulated use and other tests, whichever is applicable

L__.. ____._____

 

 

(i

 

Clinical evidence for the following:

rm
_

Implantable devices

Newly introduced device

Devices incorporating new materials coming into contact with the patient.

Existing materials applied in a body part not previously exposed to that material, and for which
no prior chemical experience exists.

e An existing device that is modified and the modification might affect safety and effectiveness.

$3.037

 

Sample of labels on the device and its packaging and other labeling materials to be used for the
device that includes users or instruction manuals

I

 

Risk assessment consisting of risk analysis. evaluation and reduction measures

 

Manufacturer information to include the following:

a. Quality Systems Certificate of approval on Design and Manufacturing or compliance certificate
with ISO 9000 series or ISO 13485. For imported medical device the Certificate shall be duly
authenticated by the territorial Philippine Consulate

b. Methods/procedures/controls used in the Quality Assurance.

c. A description of the sterilization method and the packaging used, the sterility level and the
validation ofthe sterilization process, if applicable.

 

SOHns-I‘sjgalidation Studies. if applicable. _ __

Biological evaluation. if applicable.

 

Picture of the product and representative sample or commercial presentation of the product. when
needed

 

 

. Declaration of Conformity to acceptable standards.

 

Page 2 of requirements for Class H!

 

ANNEX E

Checklist of Requirements for the Registration of Medical Devices under Class
IV (CSDT Pilot Test)
REQUIREMENTS

 

 

Notarized Application Form filed in duplicate

Photocopy of the valid License to Operate in the Philippines issued by DOH

 

For distributors. Certificate of Agreement between the Manufacturer and Distributor regarding the
device; for imported medical device. the Certiﬁcate shall be duly authenticated by the territorial
Philippine consulate

 

For imported medical devices- Certificate of Product Notification or Certificate of Product
Registration or any equivalent document attesting to the safety and effectiveness of the device
issued by the regulatory agency in the country of origin or refertxiuitt: eternity and duly
authenticated by the territorial Philippine Consulate

 

Executive Summary to include a brief introductory descriptive information on the medical device,
intended use and indications for use any novel feature and a synopsis of the content of the C SDT.
commercial marketing history. status of any pending request for market clearance and important
safety/performance related information.

CDey-icedescription Consisting ofthe following:

a. Intended use

b. Indications of use and Contraindications

c. Basic scientific concepts that form the fundamental of the device. if applicable

d. Component Material and accessories used in its principle of operation, if applicable
e. Technical Specifications to include the lbllowing:

° The functional characteristics and technical performance specifications of the device
including where relevant: accuracy, sensitivity; reliability and other factors

° Other specifications including chemical. physical, electrical, mechanical, biological,
software, sterility, stability. storage and transport, and packaging, whichever is
applicable.

f. Any warnings and/ or precautions

Principles of operation- if applicable

11. Explanation ofany novel features, if applicable

i. List of the accessories and other devices which are intended to be used in combination of the
device, if applicable.

j. 'Ihe variants of the device to be marketed including the parameters of the range of variants. if
applicable. '

k. General description of each of the timetional parts or components of the device with labeled
pictorial representations (such as, diagrams, photographs, drawings) clearly indicating each
part, with sufficient explanation to understand the drawings and diagrams, if applicable.

I. A description of the materials of the device and their physical properties to the extent
necessary to demonstrate conformity with safety and effectiveness, if applicable.

rife

 

Design Verification/Validation documents consisting of the following:

a. Certificate of Conformity to the aspect of manufacture relating to metrology for devices with
measuring functions.

b. Declaration ofConformity with product standards, if applicable

c. Summaries or reports oftests and evaluation to cover engineering test, laboratory test, stability
studies to justify the claimed shelf life, simulated use and other tests, whichever is applicable

 

 

 

 

Clinical evidence

A summary of all studies 011 which the manufacture relies to ensure that the device meets the
safety and effectiveness.

A bibliography of all published reports dealing with the use. safety. and effectiveness of the
device.

 

Sample of labels on the device and its packaging and other labeling materials to be used for the
device that includes user 5 or instruction manuals

 

Risk assessment consisting of risk analysis. evaluation and reduction measures

 

Manufacturer information to include the following:

a. Quality Systems Certificate of approval on Design and Manufacturing or compliance
certificate with ISO 9000 series or ISO 13485. For imported medical device the Certiﬁcate
shall be duly authenticated by the territorial Philippine Consulate

b. Methods/procedures/eontrols used in the Quality Assurance.

p

A description of the sterilization 111ethod and the packaging used, the sterility level and the
validation ofthe sterilization process, if applicable.

 

 

Software validation studies. if applicable

 

Biological evaluation. if applicable

Objective evidence on biological safety of the device. if the device contains animal or human
tissue or their derivatives.

 

List of counties where the device has been sold.

 

Picture of the product and representative sample or commercial presentation of the product. when
needed

a

 

Declaration of Conformity to acceptable standards.

Page 2 of requirements for Class 1 V

 

9

</body>