Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
2/F Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, 1003 Manila
Trunk Line 743-83-01 Direct Line: 711—9501; Fax: 743-1829; 743—1829; 743-1786
URL: http://www.doh.gov.ph; e—mail: osec@doh.gov.ph

       
<date>04/04/2007</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2007-0011</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Repeal of A.O. 118—B s. 1992, Entitled, “Rules and Regulations Governing the Accreditation of Clinical Laboratories for the Training of Medical Technology Interns”</subject>


<body>

I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE

Administrative Order No.118—B on the “Rules and Regulations Governing the Accreditation of Clinical Laboratories for the Training of Medical Technology Interns”, was issued March 1992 with the following objectives: 1) upgrade the training of medical technology (medtech) interns, 2) maintain the quality of laboratory services, and 3) to properly utilize the medtech interns during their internship training. The bases for this issuance were Republic Act (RA) 5527 also known as the Medical Technology Act of 1969, Executive Order (13.0.) 119 - Reorganization Act of the Ministry of Health, RA. 4688 — Clinical Laboratory Law and RA. 1517 Blood Bank Law. The regulatory authority then exercised by the Bureau of Research and Laboratories was transferred to the Bureau of Health Facilities and Services (BHFS). The DOH, through the BHFS, exercised accreditation and enforced specific technical and training requirements.

Health regulation is one of the regulatory reforms undertaken by the DOH under the FOURmula One for Health. One of the strategies identified was to harmonize and streamline systems and processes for health facility licensure such as the One—Stop—Shop Licensure System for health facilities with ancillary services aimed at making health regulation more rational, effective and client-responsive. An assessment of more than 13 years of implementing A.O. 118—B s. 1992 revealed a number of. issues and concerns with respect to imposed training standards and requirements related to the medtech internship training program. There were also problems as regards to the accreditation of clinical laboratories under the program. In this respect, a consultation meeting was convened and attended by representatives from the following stakeholders: Board of Medical Technology of the Professional Regulatory Commission, Philippine Association of Schools for Medical Technologist; Philippine Association. of Medical Technologist; Philippine Society of Pathologists; selected government and privately owned accredited clinical laboratories; Office of Programs and Standards of the-Commission of Higher Education (CHED) and, DOH offices such as, the Health Human Resource Development Bureau, the Legal Service and the BHFS. The participants of the meeting resolved that the training standards and requirements for the medtech internship training program is best handled by the CHED given that it is within their technical expertise and mandate embodied in RA. 7792, also known as Higher Education Act of 1994, which was enacted twenty~ﬁve (25) years after the Philippine Medical Technology Act of 1969 and two (2) years after the issuance of AD. 118—B s. 1992.

The resolution cited was formalized in a Memorandum of Agreement between the DOH and CHED signed last December 2006.

II. STATEMENT OF POLICIES

The MOA entered into by the DOH and CHED promulgated the following policies:

1. That the DOH shall rescind A.O. 118-B s. 1992 on the “Rules and Regulations Governing the Accreditation of Clinical Laboratories for the Training of Medical Technology Interns”, but shall continue to support and partner with the CHED in the training of medtech interns by improving and strengthening its licensing of clinical laboratories nationwide, thus ensuring that the same is technically capable to operate, perform and deliver the services as deﬁned by law;

2. That the current accreditation process enforced by A0. 118-B 5.1992 by the DOH based on the mandate provided for by RA. 5577, also known as the Philippine Medical Technology Act of 1969, shall now be turned over to the CHED where it can derive its authority from its current mandate.

3. That the much needed standards, policies and guidelines for the medtech internship training program and the DOH licensing of clinical laboratories as a mandatory requirement for afﬁliating laboratories shall be embodied in CHED’s Memorandum Order, for eventual compliance by concerned schools, universities and colleges, including afﬁliating clinical laboratories.

III. OBJECTIVES

To repeal A.O. 118-B s. 1992 and provide a mechanism for the transfer of the authority to exercise accreditation and impose training standards and requirements related to the medtech internship training program.

IV. SCOPE

All clinical laboratories as deﬁned in RA. 4688 and those that are utilized as training laboratory for the medtech internship training program.

V. GUIDELINES

l. The current accreditation process enforced under A.O. 118—B s. 1992 shall be turned over to the CHED. This includes the development of the much—needed standards, policies and guidelines for affiliating laboratories for the medtech internship training program.

2. The issuance of the accreditation certificate to clinical laboratories involved in the medtech internship training program, including those in schools, universities and colleges, shall be transferred by the DOH in favor of the CHED.

3. The DOH, through BHFS, shall continue improving and strengthening its licensing standards, policies and procedures for clinical laboratories nationwide, thus ensuring their technical capability to operate, perform and deliver the services.

4. The DOH, through the BHFS, shall pursue relevant and responsive amendments to the current implementing guidelines of the Clinical Laboratory Law embodied in A0. 59 S. 2001 also known as the “Rules and Regulations Governing the Establishment, Operation and Maintenance of Clinical Laboratories in the Philippines”

VI. REPEALING CLAUSE

A.O. 118—B S. 1992, entitled, “Rules and Regulations Governing the Accreditation of Clinical Laboratories for the Training of Medical Technology Interns,” is hereby repealed. Other DOH issuances not consistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

VII. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE

In the event that any provision or part of this Order be declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective.

VIII. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect immediately.

   
</body>
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>