Repubhc of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Ofﬁce of the Secretary
1st Flr Bldg. 13-A, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel/Fax 711-7846 Trunkline 743-8301 Lo. 1700-1701

<date>May 26, 2008</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2008-0018</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Implementation of the Programmatic Management of Drug Resistant Tuberculosis (PMDT)</subject>

<body>
I. Rationale

Multi Drug Resistance Tuberculosis (MDR-TB) has become a signiﬁcant public health problem in a number of countries and is an obstacle to effective global TB control. In many countries, the extent of drug resistance is unknown and the management of patients with MDR-TB is inadequate.

The 2nd National TB Prevalence Survey revealed that 30-35 % of TB symptomatics and conﬁrmed TB patients self medicate. Multi-drug resistance rates were 14% for new cases and 14.5% in previously-treated cases. These reﬂected that prior to DOTS, treatment compliance was inadequate resulting to alarming rates of drug resistance.

The Makati Medlcal Center (MMC) DOTS Clinic a privately-initiated DOTS Facility is the country's ﬁrst DOTS-Plus Clinic. The term “DOTS-Plus ” refers to the pilot—testing of the management of drug—resistant TB Within the context of basic Directly Observed Treatment Short—Course (DOTS) programmes. With Support from Global Fund to fight AIDS, Toberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) Round 2, the Lung Center of the Philippines (LCP) was established as the first public counterpart in MDR-TB management. This initiated the integration and decentralization of DOTS Plus services to the government sector, with the engagement of the public health centers for a community-based approach. To signify the transition of MDR- TB management from project to program mode, the term DOTS-Plus has been renamed as Programmatic Management of Drug Resistant TB (PMDT).

Treating MDR—TB is feasible and cost-efferetive, even in resdurce—iimited  countries. Effective and efﬁcient implementation of these policies will contribute to the reduction, of the TB burden in the Philippines and eventually achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDG).

These implementing guidelines were primarily based. on the 2006: WHO book entitled, “Guidelines for the Programmatic Management of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis”. The guidelines aim to disseminate technically sound and operationally feasible recommendations in a variety of geographical, political, economic and social settings.

With key partners, like GFATM, Tropical Disease Fouodation (TDF), USAID through the Linking InitiatiVes to Control TB Project (TB LINC) and World Health Organization (WHO), the National Tuberculosis Control Program. (NTP) has aptly concretized its efforts to address the problem of MDR—TB in the country.

II. Objectives

1) To prescribe an approved set of policies standards and guidelines on MDRTB management under NTP—DOTS conditions amongst public and private DOTS facilities.
2) To serve as bases for the development of training modules/tools necessary in building the capacities of DOTS service providers on MDRTB management.

III. Scope and Cove-age

The Guidelines shall-cover all DOTS facilities in accordance with the following proposed time frames:
2.1. 2006-2008: CHD—Metro Manila
2.2. 2008—2009: CHD Central Visayas (CHD VII),
2.3. 2009-2011: Other Luzon, Other Visayas and Mindanao Regions

These shall also apply to the following types of PMDT facilities, from both public and private sectors: Treatment Centers, Treatment Sites Culture Centers, DST Sites and MDRTB Housing Facility.

IV. Definitions of Terms

1 Drug Resistant Tuberculosis (DRTB)- TB (Usually pulmonary) that is resistant to one or more anti- tuberculosis drugs.
	 Multi-Drug Resistant "Tuberculosis (MDR TB) - TB that is resisrant in vitro to the two most potent line anti-TB- drugs namely, Isoniazid (H) and Rifampicin (R).

2. MDR-TB Suspect- a TB patient who possesses the risk factors for drug resistance due to poor compliance in their previous TB treatment courses and/or exposure to a drug-resistant case.

3. Treatment Center - any public or private DOTS facility providing comprehensive management of MDR—TB patients including their ofﬁcial registration. These are fixed sites that need to be selected as much as possible in every region in a phased manner.

4 Treatment Site— any public or private DOTS facility that provides basic package of MDR-TB services. These are identified based on the presence of patients within their catchment area.

5. Culture Center - any public or private DOTS laboratory identified by NTP, National TB Reference Laboratory (NTRL) and TDF, as capable of delivering quality assured sputum culture services.

5. DST Site - any public or private DOTS: laboratory, identified by NTP, NTRL and TDF, as capable of delivering drug susceptibility test (DST), performed by NTP proﬁcient Medtech and supervised by a supranational laboratory.

6. PMDT Housing Facility - a facility identified by local PMDT experts that can serve as temporary shelter/refuge of conﬁrmed MDR-TB cases coming from outside the catchment of the Treatment Centers. Admission to this facility is prioritized to patients who are indigent or cannot relocate during the infectious phase of their illness while still undergoing treatment.

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES

1. On Case Finding 

1. All MDR-TB suspects seen at the DOTS facilities, both public and private should, be screened through sputum microscoiay, culture and drug sensitivity test (DST).

2. Culture procedures shall be quality assured by the NTRL or a laboratory that is duly recognized by a supranational reference laboratory.

3. Rapid indirect rifampicin DST shall be applied whenever available and feasible, for a rapid and timely diagnosis of MDRTB.

2. On Caseholding and Treatment

1. All conﬁrmed MDRTB patients shall be assessed only by the trained physician of the PMDT Treatment Center for proper case management.

2. Treatment regimens shall consist of at least four core drugs with certain or almost certain effectiveness. The drug dosage shall be determined by body weight. A suggested weight-based dosing scheme shall be developed and included in the PMDT Training Modules.

3. All drugs shall be administered through supervised treatment for at least six days a week. Each drug and each dose shall be given by strict Direct Observed Treatment (DOT) all throughout the treatment duration.

4. Treatment shall be for a minimum duration of 18' months aﬁer sputum conversion. Extension of treatment shall be decided up0n by the consilium.

5. Treatment Sites shall only manage MDR-TB cases decentralized by the respective Treatment Center. As such, these cases are confirmed negative sputum cultures and are no longer receiving injectable drugs.

6. Only trained staff of the identified Treatment Site, as well as trained community members shall implement the caseholding of MDRTB cases at their level.

7. Conﬁrmed MDR-TB cases residing outside identiﬁed expansion areas, e.g., Metro Manila, shall be advised to relocate to an area near a Treatment Center. Those with no capability to relocate shall be prioritized to stay in the PMDT Housing Facility during the time of sputum or culture positivity.

8. The PMDT Staff shall enjoin patients on focus group discussions, training skills for livelihood projects and other socialization activities to continuously motivate them and provide them with the much needed encouragement.

3. On Recordng and Reporting

1. Recording and reporting for PMDT shall be as similar as possible to the NTP-DOTS infermation system. The NTP, in partnership with the PMDT team of TDF shall develop necessary forms for PMDT implementation, in consonance with the current NTP—DOTS policies and guidelines, as well as with these PMDT Guidelines Existing forms from theprevious PMDT Projects shall also be modiﬁed accordingly.

2. Records and reports to be used shall focus on the basic indicators needed. These forms shall contain indicators that can be routinely collected as scheduled.

3. Submission of PMDT reports shall be from the Treatment centers to the CHD concerned courtesy copied to the City Health Offices, where the patients of the respective Treatment Center come from. The CHDs shall consolidate all Treatment Center reports, jointly veriﬁed with TDF and submit to the NTP as scheduled.

4. Logistics and Drug Management

1. Procurement of SIDS shall be made in accordance to GLC standards and guidelines. At the initial stage of PMDT, the NTP shall coordinate with TDF, being the only GLC-approved agency in the country, to expedite the acquisition/procurement of these drugs.

2. Bulk/Main storage of First Line Drugs (FLDs) and Second Line Drugs (SLDS) shall be at the warehouse of the CHD uponcompliauce with the general warehousing requirements.

3. Quarterly requisitions of drugs to the CHO by the Treatment Sites shall be done for consolidation and submission to the Treatment Center. The Treatment Center shall in turn submit all consolidated requests to TDF, for forecasting purposes and preparation of an allocation list.

4. Based on the drug allocation list, the CHD shall distribute drugs to Treatment Centers on a quarterly basis or as needed. The CHO in turn, shall distribute these to the corresponding Treatment Sites.

5. Upon decentralization of the MDRTB case, the Treatinent Site shall be responsible fer the storage of the drugs requiring low temperature; including cold chain management for PASER. Cold chain management shall follow the EPI standards and guidelines.

6. Safekeeping measures and appropriate storage condition shall be strictly observed and monitored at each level.

7. In the event that unforeseen situations occur, the concerned PMDT facility shall exercise appropriate drug retrieval mechanisms.

5. On Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation

1. Monitoring of the various PMDT facilities shall be conducted by the NTP in partnership with key stakeholders including the NTRL, CHDS, LGUs and TDF.

2. There shall be a designated PMDT staff at each type of PMDT facility who shall supervise and monitor the implementation of PMDT activities.

3. Routine monitoring visits shall be done monthly for the ﬁrst six months and quarterly thereafter.

4. A monitoring tool shall be use by the monitoring team to facilitate the monitoring process.

5. Evaluation of policy implementation shall be regularly conducted. Internal assessment shall be integrated With the regular schedules of NTP’s national consultative workshops while external evaluations shall be conducted every 1-2 years, jointly with the Green Light Committee and WHO.

6. On Training

1. The CHDs in coordination with the TDF shall spearhead the conduct of various training activities for the peripheral levels. For laboratory, the NTRL and the CHD TB Reference Laboratories shall conduct the skills development/enhancement of the concerned laboratory staff.

2. Training modules shall serve as tools during the actual conduct of training sessions to guide the trainers, facilitators, trainees and the other technical experts involved.

3 A post-training evaluation shall be done, as part of supervision, to assess the capacities and identify the areas that need enhancement.

4. Training of Treatment Center Staff shall be as follows:

a. Newly hired staff of Treatment Centers shall undergo modular training on PMDT followed by an immersion or hands-on competency-based training at the TDF
Treatment Center and/or its satellites.

b. Once the staff has fulﬁlled the necessary competencies and is assessed to have satisfactory performanoe, the staff shall be deployed to the Treatment Center Where he/She shall be assigned.

c. A post-training evaluation shall be done while at the Treatment Center or at the training site. An evaluation too] shall be developed for this purpose.

VI. ROLES of KEY AGENCIES/OFFICES and PARTNERS:

A. Department of Health (DOH)
a. National Center for Disease Prevention and Control shall:
i. In collaboration With TDF, develop policies and guidelines pertinent to the
Implementatlon of a programmatic approach to manage MDRTB
ii. Oversee program implementatlon in coordination with partner agencies CHDs
and Local Government Units
iii. In consultation with NTRL and TDF, identify strategic areas for scale—up (based on disease burden and capacity of the area) for efﬁcient installation of PMDT facilities.
iv. Provide the appropriate technical assistance to peripheral levels, including the private sectors within the locale
v. Support in the provision of SLDs through the GLC- approved mechanlsms
vi. Monitor and evaluate the overall implementation and initiate revisions in the policies as the case maybe
vii. Collaborate with its key partners in the: private sector, such as the TDF, for a public-private partnership environment
viii. Participate in key activities relative to PMDT implementation

b. National TB Reference Laboratory shall:
i.  Serve as the topmost laboratory facility for PMDT implementation
ii. Develop policies, standards and guidelines on PMDT laboratory services including quality assurance system
iii. Provide technical assistance to other public TB Reference laboratories and to private laboratories that are engaged fer PMDT
iv. Provide logistical support like culture media, to identiﬁed culture centers nationwide
v. Perform DST amongst MDRTB suspects referred by Treatment Centers within its
catchment
vi. Jointly monitor, supervise and evaluate the laboratory performance/status. of PMDT laboratories and provide feedback to NCDPC and CHD

c. Center for Health Development (CHD) shall:
i. Oversee implementation of PMDT at the local levels, both within the public and the private sectors and at the respective CHD TB Reference Laboratory
ii. Advocate to Local Chief Executives, Hospital Chiefs, PPMD Unit Heads to provide necessary support on PMDT implementation
iii. Facilitate the conduct of training, in partnership with TDF, for a public-private approach:
iv. Consolidate reports for joint analysis with NTP and key stakeholders

B. Local Government Unit (LGU) shall:
1. Implement the policies and ensure compliance/adherence to agreed plan
2. Allow the concerned health staff to deVelop their technical capacities and skills for quaIity delivery of PMDT Services
3. Prepare, analyze and submit the necessary reports at their level
4. Participate in the monitoring, supervision and evaluation activities

C. Tropical Disease Foundation (TDF) shall:
1. Implement the PMDT component of all Global Fund Projects on TB, in consultation with the NTP and other GF partners
2. Jointly plan with the NTP in sealing-up the implementation of PMDT
3. Support the: NTP at all levels in providing the needed technical assistance on training, monitoring and evaluation
4. Facilitate with the GLC on the logistic mechanisms for procurement of SLDs
5. Initiate advocacy to the private sector, together with the NTP, for their engagement to relevant PMDT activities

VII. FUNDING

The NTP shall support the implementation of these guidelines with initial funding coming from the GFATM Rounds 2 and 5. Resouree sharing and mobilization from other partners like: WHO, PhilCAT and others shall be encouraged. As part of the mainstreaming, the DOH, shall take responsibility to pursue its implementation.

VII. EFFECTIVITY:
This Order shall take effect immediately upon approval
</body>
  
<sign>FRANCISCO DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

