Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. # 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue 
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines 
Tel. # (632)-743-8301 locals 1107/1125; 711-9502; 711—9503 

 
<date>May 2, 2008</date>

<doctype>Administrative Order</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2008- 0020</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Policy Guide on Local Health Systems Development</subject>

<body>
1. Rationale/Background 

Actual localities in the Philippines, classiﬁed within each category of barangay, municipality, city or province, have widely variable population sizes and densities, poverty incidence, levels of socio-economic development, degrees of urbanization, ethnic and cultural composition, exposure to different health risks, geographic features, among other dimensions. Current levels and future prospects of health status also vary considerably among populations of different localities. Some variations in health status among localities are associated with variations in performance of local health care providers and public health professionals. 

Despite variations in health of different localities, however, the Department of Health (DOH) as an institution is interested in getting health status of populations of all localities to converge around a high and rising average level. At least three reasons justify this interest in all Philippine localities converging toward similarly good health status. First, attaining the Government’s national Objectives for health, including ofﬁcial targets for Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in health, depends to a great extent on all localities achieving high consolidated performance of their respective public and private health services. Second, since DOH is authorized by the Local Government Code (LGC) to intervene in local situations that pose serious public health threats to the country, such as outbreaks of epidemics, the Department naturally wants to pre—empt such situations by ensuring that all localities have sufﬁcient capacities to effectively protect and take care of their own health. Third, given that continued and equitable progress in overall health is important for the country’s political stability and socio—economic development, it is natural for DOH to work with all localities to deliver improved health for all Filipinos wherever they might live. 

After more than fifteen years since passage of LGC in 1991, however, localities by themselves have not all succeeded in improving the health of their respective local populations so that these converge around a high and rising national average. There are many reasons for this failure. First, health improvement may not always be a high priority development goal of all localities. Second, even in many localities where health is a priority goal, the capacity to plan well or to ﬁnance a good plan or to properly execute a well-ﬁnanced plan, may not always be present. Third, even when individual localities by themselves are able to improve their own health, neighboring localities may not follow their example and still end up exposed to risks of disease outbreaks. Fourth, even when groups of neighboring localities improve their collective health together, their efforts may not always be sustained long enough to achieve public health impact at a wider scale. 

DOH interest in getting health of all localities to converge around a high and rising average level may therefore also be meeting a need that local governments by themselves cannot meet consistently. 

DOH involvement in local health systems is well within the legal framework of the Local Government Code. The LGC assigned different roles in directing, providing and ﬁnancing health services among barangay, municipal, city, and provincial levels of local government, with residual functions not speciﬁed allocated to DOH at the national level. 

The LGC indicated two kinds of activities that were included under “devolved health services”. One kind of activity comprises the functions of local health authorities, speciﬁcally the functions of municipal, city and provincial health ofﬁces, which were integrated as organic units of municipal, city and provincial governments, respectively. For these functions, each local government has exclusive responsibility for assuming and exercising the respective local health authorities devolved to it. Provinces cannot establish municipal or city health ofﬁces nor municipalities and cities band together and establish their own provincial health ofﬁces. 

The other type of “devolved health services” comprises various categories of health services such as follows: 
- Services assigned to municipalities and cities: "primary health care, maternal and child care, communicable and non-communicable disease control, family planning services, among others" 
- Services assigned to provinces: "hospitals and population development services" 

The LGC mandates for this latter type of devolved health services cannot be regarded as exclusive, complete, and self-contained to each assigned level of government. For example, maternal and child care or communicable disease control services assigned to municipalities and cities can and, in fact, should also be delivered by provinces as well as by the DOH, as appropriate. Similarly, despite public hospitals being assigned to provinces, others like municipalities, cities or DOH can also operate public hospitals. 

Unlike municipal, city and provincial health ofﬁces, which fall under exclusive authority of their respective municipal, city and provincial governments, the latter type of “devolved health services” cannot be delivered effectively and efﬁciently to the whole population unless various levels of government cooperate and coordinate. Each province, city and municipality cannot viably and effectively render "primary health care, maternal and child care, communicable and non-communicable disease control, family planning services, hospitals, population development services, among others" unless different levels of LGUs and the DOH coordinate to assure availability of and access to the whole range of health services necessary. The LGC clearly authorizes provinces to coordinate services devolved to municipalities and cities. The LGC also recognizes that DOH has authority to provide technical and operational guidance to LGUs providing devolved health services to their local populations. 

The health mandates in the LGC therefore include: (a) that each LGU maintains and operates its respective municipal, city or provincial health ofﬁce as its exclusive corresponding local health authority; (b) that all LGUs coordinate, supplement, and complement each other’s health services, most notably through inter-municipal, city- municipal, or provincial—municipal relationships in local delivery of basic health services; (c) that in health matters all LGUs work under the technical leadership and coordination role of DOH. 

DOH supports the full realization of these health mandates of LGC. As the prime national health agency, DOH has authority to consult and collaborate with LGUs in order to further improve delivery of health care at every locality. Based on its ﬁndings and observations, DOH can deﬁne what it regards as its best role and functions to support local health service delivery. DOH then uses its national health budget, its organic units and attached agencies to inﬂuence actual combined performance of different LGUs towards greater overall efﬁciency, effectiveness and equity in health across all localities. 

For these practical reasons and with this legal basis, DOH hereby adopts and implements a strategy for supporting the development of LGU-led local health systems. This Administrative Order provides guidelines for DOH actions to support efforts of all localities to improve the health of their respective local populations. 

II. Statement/Declaration of Policy 

The continuous development of LGU-led local health systems is a major channel for implementing health sector reform under the Fourrnula One for Health framework (F1). The reform is intended to deliver to every Philippine locality the beneﬁts of better health outcomes achieved with equitable health ﬁnancing and greater public satisfaction from health care. 

The operations of the DOH and its attached agencies, including its central ofﬁces, Centers for Health Development at regions, and retained hospitals, shall seek to optimize their separate and combined positive inﬂuences in support to local health systems development. DOH support will be oriented to:   (a) raising on—going current performance of all localities in the short term;   (b) reforming underlying local structures and processes necessary to sustain higher performance in the medium term, and; (c) developing new and better local capacities necessary for localities to secure even higher sustained performance over the long term. 

III. Goal and Objectives 

General Goal: All localities of the country, particularly those localities where prevailing conditions make people more vulnerable to illnesses and premature deaths, are served by local health systems that continuously develop to yield improved health outcomes for all, with the costs of health care shared equitably, to the public’s satisfaction with overall system performance. The categories of local health outcomes deemed important to improve at national scale are those included in the National Objectives for Health. 

This local health system goal simply re—states the sector-wide goal of F1 in local terms. This goal is achieved through attainment of speciﬁc objectives corresponding to each of the four pillars of F1, namely, governance, regulation, service delivery and ﬁnancing. 

Speciﬁc Objectives: 

1. Governance: Local governments at barangay, municipal, city and provincial levels include, among their top priority local development goals, securing for their respective localities the services of a high performing local health system yielding good health outcomes with costs ﬁnanced fairly to the overall satisfaction of the public. 

2. Regulation: All local health authorities (i.e., municipal, city and provincial health ofﬁces) maintain adequate levels of essential technical, administrative and ﬁscal capacities necessary to perform basic functions of local governments in regulating environmental, living and social conditions critical to public health as mandated by national legislation. 

3. Service Delivery: Local health care providers from public and private sectors establish and sustain health service provisions that meet essential quality standards, are accessible to everyone in the localities and assure adequate coverage of local health care needs. 

4. Financing: The costs of providing and using health care at localities are ﬁnanced fairly in ways that sustain cost-effective delivery and equitable utilization of quality care by everyone in need. 

IV. Scope or Coverage 

These guidelines administratively govern the operations of DOH, its organic units and attached agencies. The intended beneﬁciaries of these guidelines, however, are all Filipinos at all localities through their respective local governments. 

As far as the localities included in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao are concerned, DOH shall make appropriate representations to request the Autonomous Regional Government through its Department of Health-ARMM to issue a regional issuance similar in purpose to this Order but adjusted for the unique and speciﬁc conditions of this autonomous region. 

A customized version of these guidelines applicable for highly urbanized localities, notably in Metro-Manila, among others, shall be developed into a separate strategy for DOH support to urban health systems development. This effort shall be led by the CHD— NCR as the DOH unit providing technical leadership for support to other highly urbanized areas of the country. As far as highly urbanized localities, therefore, this AO shall be implemented through separate instructions on the guidance of DOH support under an Urban Health Systems Development strategy. 

V. Deﬁnition of Terms 

1. Local health systems: localities in the Philippine are served by “local health systems”, which, following the WHO conceptual framework on health systems (World Health Report 2000), are deﬁned as “all organizations, institutions and resources devoted to undertaking local health actions”. The Philippine health system may be regarded as a collection of different local health systems serving their respective localities supported by national policies, programs and activities. 

2. Local health actions: include all local efforts __ public health services (such as surveillance and disease response), personal health care (such as diagnosis and treatment of individual patients), inter-sectoral initiatives (such as nutrition, sanitation, trafﬁc safety, etc) — intended to improve health status of local populations. 

3. Local health system development: positive change in local health systems in the form of improved performance, or structural/process reforms, or enhanced capacities towards attaining better health outcomes, fairer ﬁnancing and greater public satisfaction. 

4. Local health ﬂstem development cluster: a clustering of localities (municipalities, cities or provinces) undertaken by DOH useful for its own purposes of conceptualizing, analyzing, strategizing and long-term planning of local health systems development 

5. Local health authorities: component units of local governments, such as municipal, city or provincial health ofﬁces, which are institutionally mandated to perform basic public health functions in localities. 

6. Inter-LGU coordination in health: actions of two or more LGUs to jointly adopt and implement in a coordinated manner a common set of policies, programs, projects or activities in order to achieve common health goals or purposes 

7. lnter-local health zone: any form of organized arrangement for coordinating the operations of an array and hierarchy of health providers and facilities, which typically includes primary health providers, core referral hospital and end-referral hospital, jointly serving a common population within a local geographic area under the jurisdictions of more than one local government 

8. National health programs: multi-year, structured and organized activities undertaken across several provinces, regions or whole country in order to achieve a speciﬁc set of health outcomes which DOH determines as deserving continued national government attention, advocacy or support 

9. National Objectives for Health: speciﬁc health outcomes identiﬁed and adopted by DOH as among those most important for the whole country to achieve 

10. Province-wide Investment Plan for Health (PIPH): a plan prepared and adopted by LGUs within a province, and agreed to be supported by DOH and its development partners in health, that deﬁnes local health systems improvements to be attained in the province through the proposed application of public investments jointly funded by LGUs, DOH and development partners 

ll. Fourmula One for Health: DOH’s policy and operational framework for implementing the health sector reform agenda 

VI. General Guidelines 

A. In implementing F1 across all localities, DOH shall pursue specific priority reforms in its support to local health systems development. 

The DOH implements Fl at localities by enabling key stakeholders of local health systems such as LGU ofﬁcials, local health providers, and beneﬁciary communities, among others, to secure for themselves the beneﬁts of local health systems development. Among the many aspects of F1, however, the DOH shall ﬁrst focus its support for local health systems development that is marked by the following speciﬁc reform priorities under each of the four Fl pillars: 

1. Priorities in local governance reforms: 
- To secure LGU ownership of, political commitment to, and public accountability for, the goal of local health systems yielding better outcomes in health status, equitable ﬁnancing and public satisfaction; 
- To enable routine local decision—making on local public health efforts to be primarily guided by evidence and scientiﬁc knowledge; and 
- To build informed public support for continuous local health systems reforms 

Explanation: Local governance of health systems featuring LGU commitment to better system outcomes, with decision—making on health driven by data and science, and with progress built on informed public support, are the basics of F1 reform at local levels. 

2. Priorities in local regulatory reforms:
- To even out effective performance of functions related to enforcement of essential public health regulations across all municipal, city and provincial ofﬁces 

Explanation: Consistent enforcement across localities of key national regulations with greatest impact on public health conditions is the most important initial contribution of the regulations pillar to attainment of F1 goals. 

3. Priorities in local service delivery reforms: 
- To achieve universal population coverage of nationally—recommended cost—effective health services, with priority inclusion within effective service coverage as soon as possible of those remaining pockets of un-served or under-served populations 
- To attain public health impact by sustaining high levels of effective health service coverage 

Explanation: Universalizing coverage of a basic package of cost-effective services, expanded ﬁrst to cover previously excluded communities, and sustaining this high population coverage over time, are the most valuable initial service delivery contributions to attainment of F1 goals. 

4. Priorities in local ﬁnancing reforms: 
- To improve linkage between local health system performance and local health ﬁnancing, particularly increased public health effectiveness of total local health spending 
- To broaden, diversify and stabilize the sources of ﬁnancing for local health care expenditures; 

Explanation: Increasing health system output and public health impact from given levels of local health spending, on the spending side, and more reliable sources of health spending, on the revenue side, are the two most important initial advances in health ﬁnancing that best ﬁt the other reforms. 

B. To achieve specified F1 reform priorities, DOH operations to support local health systems development shall focus on selected areasfor engaging with localities. 

DOH operations shall move away from ineffective hierarchical and cascading approaches common before devolution. DOH operations will instead seek to stimulate and reinforce LGU—led local health systems development towards realizing the priority Fl reforms speciﬁed in the previous section. In order to enhance positive impact of DOH support for local health systems development along these priorities, DOH operations relative to localities shall focus on the following eight (8) selected areas of engagement: 

1. Improve their functionality in health matters, and strengthen with greater public participation, those key LGU structures with mandates for local health system governance such as ofﬁces of local chief executives, health committees of local legislative bodies, and local health boards 

2. Facilitate routine working relationships between local chief executives and local health ofﬁcers that are productive, professional and mutually respecting 

3. Improve working conditions according to nationally legislated standards and build capacities according to deﬁned performance requirements of staff at local health ofﬁces as basic input for all local health authorities to enforce essential public health regulations consistently across all localities 

4. Promote local level cooperation in service delivery and ﬁnancing among LGUs and between LGUs and DOH, as well as coordination between hospitals and ﬁeld health services and partnerships between public and private providers (such as those being promoted by inter-LGU coordination and inter—local health zones, among others) 

5. Improve quality of health service interventions actually implemented at scale at all localities (notably those services included in national health programs) 

6. Sustain high coverage levels and adequate scope of public health effort despite changes in local administrations (across 3-year tenures of LGU ofﬁcials) and across different local jurisdictions 

7. Recommend, re-orient or reinforce, as appropriate, local priorities and targets in expanding health service coverage in favor of previously excluded or disadvantaged groups 

8. Plan and implement public and private investments in health at localities, such as those covered by Province-wide Investment Plan for Health (PIPH) and those undertaken by private health care enterprises; mobilize and utilize ﬁnancing for health through local government budgets, Philhealth beneﬁt payments, DOH budget, employer contributions, out-of—pocket payments, and other sources. 

The existing portfolio of DOH programs, projects and activities shall be packaged, organized, and implemented in order to address these eight (8) focus areas of engagement with local health systems. 

C. DOH support to local health systems development shall seek to exploit as best as possible various opportunities for positive change already being created by many important autonomous local processes. 

DOH operations to support local health systems development proceed in a context where localities are likely to indicate a strong demand or at least receptiveness for health reforms that improve health outcomes, make ﬁnancing more equitable or increase public satisfaction. Local demand for or receptiveness to more active local health system development could be driven by one or more of the following local processes: 

1. Economic pressures intensify urgency for health sector reforms: Economic resources available for health coming from communities and households remain limited by still modest average growth rates of whole economy. Population growth drives overall health care needs to rise faster than families and communities intended or preferred. Costs of health care inputs also rise rapidly. Increased opportunities for health workers to seek employment abroad create more pressures to raise domestic incomes of those health workers who remain. Meanwhile, people’s demands and expectations for health care rise further as levels of education and household incomes improve. These underlying pressures drive stakeholders to demand that their local health systems deliver better outcomes from available resources, distribute the ﬁnancial burdens of health care costs more equitably and generate more public satisfaction. DOH support can enable local health systems to develop and meet these demands successfully through appropriate and pro—active reforms. 

2. Public interest in better health becomes more important in local politics. Some local political leaders (some governors and mayors) emerge and win elections based on a popular health agenda. Important local constituencies with health agenda also become more politically active and inﬂuential. Improving local health becomes a focus of competition among contending factions in local political competitions. Political situations like these offer opportunities to alter constraints, structures and attributes of local health systems. Local political interests with health agenda that gain local power will, however, require competent, credible and timely technical support to translate their political motivations and access to political power into authentic institutionalized local health system reform and development. DOH can provide this support. 

3. Social forms of ﬁnancing health care expands: Health ﬁnancing expands beyond individual, out-of-pocket payments for health care. Social forms of ﬁnancing (or population—based ﬁnancing) for health, such as tax-based ﬁnancing of health or premium—based social health insurance, can alter local systems. For example, some LGUs build stronger revenue bases that then support efﬁcient and sustainable expansion of publicly-ﬁnanced health services for all. Alternatively, other LGUs attain universal Philhealth enrollment of their total local population by combining subsidized enrollment of indigents, mandatory enrollment of formally employed and expansion of individually paying enrollment. Expansion of tax-ﬁnanced health care and/or of Philhealth—covered health beneﬁts at localities, however, need DOH support for implementing feasible plans to translate these local ﬁnancing reforms into corresponding service delivery improvements, which lead to more rational health care utilization, which ultimately deliver greater public health gains. 

4. Service capacities available in localities improve, popular new services are introduced: Supply-side improvements in local service capacities can create opportunities for systems improvement. Public investments (through grants and external assistance) and private investments (by investors in local health business enterprises) may create new or better health service provisions in the locality. Some LGUs even mobilize internal savings or tap external borrowing to improve local health service capacities. These situations, however, need DOH assistance to develop appropriate ﬁnancing and governance mechanisms to focus and sustain the public health impact of these service capacity improvements. 

5. Some leaders of local health ofﬁces catalyze action in local health sector: One major area of local leadership in health revolves around local health ofﬁcers. These professionals, particularly when working with effective local chief executives, can stimulate reforms of local health systems. They can, for example, facilitate greater transparency, responsiveness and accountability of health services to local populations or arrange for better—organized logistical support for health providers. These governance changes can then catalyze wider local health system reform by eliminating waste and corruption, by improving efﬁciency and effectiveness, by widening service coverage of the local health system, by increasing people’s participation in health governance. These situations, however, need DOH assistance in securing service capacity improvements and appropriate ﬁnancing reforms to translate the governance changes into visible and sustainable beneﬁts. 

6. Some public health conditions in localities dramatically improve: Local socio-economic development (such as universal electriﬁcation, wider household access to safe water, among others) as well as excellent local health system performance in public health programs important to the locality (such as safe motherhood, child health or control of prevalent infectious diseases) can dramatically improve some local public health conditions. Program-speciﬁc mobilization or adequately funded public investment projects may also induce some of these improvements. Better public health conditions comprise visible health beneﬁts that are appreciated by local populations, who can then be encouraged to support measures to sustain and build on these health improvements. This process can induce larger changes in local governance and ﬁnancing that are locally led and supported. These situations, however, need DOH assistance in translating good public health performance in one disease concern into systems changes in the organization, delivery and ﬁnancing of local health services. 

D. DOH support to local health systems development can follow many different paths that all lead to emergence and institutionalization of key desired common attributes of all local health systems in the country. 

DOH support to local health systems development seeks to enable all localities to secure for themselves the beneﬁts of the three Fl goals, namely, better health, more equitable ﬁnancing and greater public satisfaction. In order to focus local health systems development ﬁrst on the most important fundamentals of F1 reforms, DOH support has prioritized certain speciﬁc reforms in governance, regulation, service delivery and ﬁnancing. To increase likelihood that all localities equally realize these priority reforms, DOH operations shall focus its support on 8 selected areas of engagement with localities. 

To further increase the chances of success in inducing positive change in all localities, planning and implementation of DOH support shall recognize and exploit a number of local processes that already, and will continue to, drive local health reforms. In practice, all these mean that DOH support to local health systems development will require extensive customization as this follows different paths depending on different local needs, capacities and responses. In order to guide all DOH units and attached agencies through the complexities and uncertainties of this effort to support widely varying trajectories of local health systems development, however, it is critical to deﬁne the key desired attributes common to all local health systems that should progressively emerge and eventually become institutionalized as the intermediate combined effect of the full range of DOH support. 

Regardless of the pathways it takes, DOH support to local health systems development should commonly lead to the emergence and institutionalization of the following four key desired attributes of local health systems: 

1. Same basic technical (clinical and public health) standards govern all health services: Whatever health care is provided, whoever provides it, wherever it is provided, it is ﬁrst of all technically adequate quality care based on prevailing professional knowledge and opinion. 

2. Deﬁned range of a continuum of health services available at all localities: There are different types of services (preventive, promotive, curative, restorative) available for different types of clients (women, mothers, children, adolescents, adults, older persons) at different levels of the local health system (home, primary care outlet, core referral hospital, end referral hospital, inter-sectoral partners), which are appropriate and effective for expected numbers of different types and levels of need for care. 

3. Everyone can access available services: No one in need is excluded from using available health services. These previously excluded are progressively included. 

4. Financial burden on user of services is eliminated as signiﬁcant barrier to appropriate and timely use by anyone in need: Everyone uses health care based on need regardless of their means to pay. 

The above four key attributes — same technical standards, deﬁned range of services, universal access to services and elimination of ﬁnancial barriers to use — all continue to develop side by side to higher and better levels as localities develop economically. Localities keep on improving prevailing standards, widening range of available services, improving access by all to these services, and eliminating effects of ﬁnancial burden of health care on users as socio—economic conditions continue to improve. 

Continuous assessment on the progress of these four key attributes characterizing different local health systems shall be the basis for planning, adjusting and implementing on—going support of DOH to LGU-led local health systems development. 

E. Roles of DOH units and attached agencies in supporting local health systems development 

DOH operations to support LGU-led local health systems development will be carried out by different units and attached agencies of DOH with different and complementary roles that they will perform consistent with their respective institutional mandates. All DOH units and attached agencies shall adjust performance of their respective mandates in order to maximize individual and joint contributions to each of the above 8 focus areas of support to local health system development. In order to maximize total impact of DOH operations on LGU—led local health systems development across all localities, the following are the indicative roles of DOH units and attached agencies: 

1. Central DOH ofﬁces: Mandate sectoral policy directions, establish technical standards, manage national health programs and execute authorized DOH budgets; these actions altogether create the general climate inﬂuencing decisions and actions of LGU—led local health system development 

2. Field Implementation Management Ofﬁces (FIMO): Strategic leadership, management and coordination of ﬁeld implementation, consolidation of annual plans, budgets and projects, leadership in health emergencies covering inter-regional operations of DOH in support of local health systems development through oversight, monitoring and evaluation, technical supervision, quality assurance of DOH hospitals, facilitation of experience exchange and elevation to DOH Execom of ﬁeld implementation issues and concerns. FIMO shall take the lead in promotion of best practices and public-private partnerships; coordinating operations of retained DOH hospitals; overseeing all ofﬁcial agreements between DOH and LGUs; facilitating coordinated provision of technical assistance and capacitation of CHDs; monitoring and evaluating CHD operations. 

3. Centers for Health Development: Coordinate delivery to local health systems of all forms of support initiated, mobilized or arranged by DOH for the beneﬁt of localities, including advocacy, training, orientation, facilitation, technical assistance, conditional resource transfers and monitoring, among others, as appropriate; lead coordination among regional units of DOH—attached agencies assisting local health systems development; capacitate and mobilize DOH representatives to serve as ﬁeld level facilitators of DOH support to local health system development; perform all delegated or decentralized regulatory functions of the DOH. 

4. DOH-retained hospitals: Adjust current and future service delivery operations affecting localities and LGUs within respective catchment areas to reinforce positive effects on local health system development consistent with central DOH mandates and coordination directions issued by FIMOs and CHDs, as appropriate. 

5. PHIC: Implement the National Health Insurance Program policies in enrollment, accreditation, beneﬁts and payment to support identiﬁed priorities in local health systems development 

6. Population Commission: Coordinate the national population management policy and program to support identiﬁed priorities in local health systems development 

7. National Nutrition Council: Coordinate national nutrition policies and programs to support identiﬁed priorities in local health systems development 

VII. Speciﬁc Guidelines 

1. The ﬁndings of Program Implementation Reviews shall be used for source of data for a systematic rapid review of current DOH operations (i.e., current portfolio of programs, projects and activities) from the standpoint of their speciﬁc intended effects on local health systems development. DOH programs and activities shall also be related to the 8 focus areas of engagement with localities outlined in Section VI.B above. Various aspects of DOH Operations shall be delineated as to whether these are primarily intended to improve current performance of local health systems, or to reform existing structures or processes of local health systems, or to build new or enhanced capacities in local health systems. 

Such review will identify strengths and weaknesses, actual coverage, gaps or overlaps of existing DOH operations as support to LGU-led local health systems development. Findings of the review will be used to guide implementors of current programs, projects and activities according to the policy directions of this Order. The ﬁndings shall also be used as basis for future research and development in terms of new programs, projects and activities that need to be rolled out to better support local health systems development. 

2. FIMOS working with CHDs shall delineate multi—province, single province or sub- provincial clusters of localities, as appropriate, that share common priorities in improving health programs performance, seeking reforms in local structures or processes related to health, or meeting needs for new or enhanced health sector capacities. These groupings of localities (local health systems development clusters) shall be identiﬁed internally by DOH as clusters for planning its support to LGU»led local health systems development. DOH regards these clusters as consisting of geographically contiguous localities, which have a combined population that shares a common health situation in terms of:   (a) similar factors that affect health status and use of available health services; (b) a common community of providers that serve them, and (c) convenient common platforms for political advocacy and technical leadership in the ﬁeld of health. Such a cluster should be relatively stable and may be reasonably expected to become in the future even more integrated as one community as far as the operation of their local health sector is concerned. This clustering is often necessary because the political jurisdictions may often ignore well—deﬁned patterns of health needs and behavior of local populations. 

DOH shall identify a limited number of clusters of localities in every region as the object or recipient of its medium- to long-term planning and support to LGU-led local health systems development. 

FIMOS working with CHDs shall then develop customized and speciﬁc strategies for supporting LGU-led local health systems development for each cluster over periods of 5—10 years. In order to develop these cluster—speciﬁc DOH support strategies, the following steps need to be undertaken. First, understand better the speciﬁc trends, directions, opportunities and drivers for local health systems development at each cluster, based on information contained in Section VI.C above. Second, identify possible entry points for DOH support using the 8 focus areas, outlined in Section VI.B above, which builds on and reinforces current local initiatives for positive change. Third, formulate strategies speciﬁc for each cluster to improve current performance, reform existing processes and structures, and develop capacities to more effectively achieve Fl goals and objectives. For each cluster delineated, a medium— to long-term strategy should be formulated and ofﬁcially adopted by the DOH as the basic guide of all its current and future support to local health systems in that cluster. 

The DOH support strategy for each cluster shall serve as the basic and stable guide for planning, budgeting, organizing, delivering, monitoring and evaluating all forms and types of support that DOH and its attached agencies provide to localities in that cluster. This support strategy shall indicate how cooperation among LGUs and with DOH would be improved in order to serve the population better; how underlying attributes of local health systems in the cluster are going to be modiﬁed towards the key common attributes speciﬁed in Section VLD above; how DOH support would link up with local resources and local capacities for LGU—led local health systems development. 

4. The whole DOH organization shall then deliver well-planned, well—organized, prioritized, high—quality, responsive and customized support to local health systems in each cluster based on the DOH support strategy for that cluster. DOH Central Ofﬁces, Field Implementation Management Ofﬁces and Centers of Health Development, as well as Philhealth, Popcorn and NNC shall plan and organize their respective support to localities using the DOH support strategy for each cluster as a guide. Depending on the readiness and receptiveness of LGUs in each cluster, DOH may negotiate and enter into tenure-based agreements with LGUs that segment into 3—year sections the delivery of the DOH longer—term support strategies to coincide with the tenures of elected ofﬁcials (for example, 2007—2010, 2010—2013, 2013—2016, and so on). 

Current operations within each year shall mainly revolve around the delivery of committed and agreed support to LGU—led local health systems development based on the DOH support strategy for each cluster. This means that all DOH operations related to F1 implementation at local levels would henceforth be conceptualized, planned and implemented as part of coordinated activities based on a DOH support strategy to each local health systems development cluster. Operations of DOH retained hospitals, for example, would then be planned, managed and supervised as a key part of larger DOH support strategy within the cluster served by these hospitals. 

CHDs will be critical points to integrate, coordinate, sequence and pace all DOH operations in support of local health systems development. CHDs will be: (a) stewards of the DOH support strategies for all clusters in the region; (b) providers of signiﬁcant portions of support included in such strategies; (0) coordinators of all other sources of support involved in implementing such strategies; and (d) dialogue partners of LGUs and other local stakeholders that are the objects and recipients of DOH support. 

VIII. Implementation Arrangements/Mechanisms 

l. A Technical Working Group for Support to Local Health Systems Development (TWG-SLHSD) shall be organized to guide the implementation of this Order. It shall include representatives from key central ofﬁces and FIMOS, selected CHDs, and attached agencies of Philhealth, Popcorn and NNC. This TWG shall serve as the working group to map out and organize all activities and actions necessary to mobilize the DOH and its attached agencies to implement this Order. The TWG shall lead the review of current DOH operations as support to local health systems development outlined in Section VIII above. The Bureau of Local Health Development shall serve as the secretariat of this TWG. 

2. The Field Implementation Management Ofﬁces shall lead in preparing CHDs to eventually serve as principal regional technical agencies for DOH support to local health systems development and preparing DOH—retained hospitals to more effectively contribute to that support. 

Preparing the CHDs involves their rapid transformation from their current operations into becoming technical agencies for delivering DOH support to local health systems development based on policies contained in this Order. This transformation involves, among others, proper orientation of CHD staff on local health system development; assessment of CHD readiness to serve as technical agencies for support to local health system development; capacity building of CHD staff for their new roles; assisting CHDs to delineate clusters of localities according to Section VII. 2 above and to develop cluster—speciﬁc support strategies according to Section VII.3 above; and enabling CHDs to lead other regional ofﬁces of DOH—attached agencies to plan and execute their support to local health system development according to Section VII.4 above. 

Preparing the DOH-retained hospitals involves strategic planning and operations review to improve these hospitals’ contribution to the development of local health systems in localities that are within their service areas. 

3. With guidance, support and oversight of FIMOS, the CHDs shall bear the principal burden of undertaking their own transformation and eventual emergence as principal regional technical agencies for DOH support to local health systems development. In summary, this involves the transformation of CHDs into authentic centers of knowledge, expertise and inﬂuence for local health development toward better health, more equitable ﬁnancing and greater public satisfaction. 

CHD Directors shall lead the review, planning and organizing necessary to implement this Order within their respective regions. The TWG-SLHSD shall arrange to make available the necessary technical assistance that CHD Directors may require to transform their current operations as required by this Order. CHD Directors are hereby authorized to undertake a review of their existing staff and their existing operations and activities in order to identify technical assistance needs for transformation. CHD Directors are further authorized to prepare proposed plans for staff deployment and functional assignments as well as proposed budget execution plans in order to improve CHD capacities to implement this Order. 

4. As part of CHDs’ preparations to implement this Order, CHD Directors are instructed to lead their staff in undertaking an initial desk assessment of the status of local health systems development from the narrow viewpoint of the CHDs’ current concerns and impressions (i.e., not from local stakeholders” perspectives). First, each CHD shall list all programs and policies (legislation, executive order, DOH order) that it is implementing throughout the region. Second, each CHD shall assemble whatever data it has available on the latest status of program performance and policy implementation of every locality in the region. Third, each CHD shall construct a subjective performance rating of all local health ofﬁcers throughout the region based on prevailing impressions of CHD staff. 

Fourth, each CHD shall make a subjective assessment of the prospects of local health system improvements at each locality based on consensus impressions of CHD staff. Fifth, CHDs shall then take the data and ratings generated by this exercise and compare these with the data and ﬁndings from the LGU Scorecard. The result of this desk assessment will be a listing of localities with corresponding data per locality on performance in programs, status of policy implementation, impressions on performance of local health ofﬁcers, impressions of local prospects for health systems improvement, and ratings from LGU Scorecard. 

The CHD’s results shall provide valuable information on quality of data and information about local health systems readily available to CHDs; on distribution and intensity among localities of varying levels of program performance and policy implementation; possible links between CHD impressions of local health ofﬁcers and their localities’ program performance and policy implementation; preliminary scanning of prospects for local health system development in the region. These data may serve as a basis for determining initial technical assistance to CHDs. 

5. Agencies attached to DOH (i.e., Philhealth, Popcom and NNC) shall rely on their respective governance mechanisms (Board, Commissions) and their respective management structures (President, Executive Directors) to deﬁne the appropriate operational details concerning their respective agencies’ support to local health systems development that is compatible with the implementation of their respective programs. 

Each attached agency shall deﬁne operational details for all their program activities involving localities. Each agency’s respective operations involving localities should then be linked, coordinated and performed as part of a larger package of DOH support to local health systems development according to the provisions of this Order. Each attached agency is requested to: (a) identify speciﬁc on-going program elements, projects or activities that involve LGUs and stakeholders at localities; (b) propose coordination mechanism with DOH at regional and sub—regional levels, if appropriate; (0) suggest planning and monitoring procedures to assure maximum effectiveness of combined DOH- family support to local health systems development. 

IX. Repealing/Separability Clause 

All administrative orders, rules or regulations inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modiﬁed accordingly. In the event that any provision or part of this Order were declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective. 

X. Effectivity 

This order shall take effect immediately upon approval.
</body>

 
<sign>FRANCISCO DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 

