Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>Oct 30, 2009</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2009 - 0019 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Procedures on Handling Complaints in the Department of Health </subject>


<body>
I. RATIONALE 

Guided by the principle that public ofﬁce is a public ”trust and that all public ofﬁcials and employees must at all times be accountable to the people, serve them with utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efﬁciency as well as serve the Filipino constituents with sincerity and patriotism, lead a modest life and committed to uphold the rule of law and the highest standards of honesty, integrity and transparency in the performance of their ofﬁcial duties and responsibilities in the Department of Health. 

It is on this premise that there is a need to establish a procedure of handling complaints in the Department of Health to cover rank and ﬁle employees to senior level positions of the organization. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This procedure aims to establish a uniform process of handling complaints ﬁled against ofﬁcials and employees of the Department of Health including where to ﬁle the same. 

III. SCOPE 

This shall be applicable to all complaints ﬁled by any ofﬁcial or employee of the Department of Health which includes all government retained hospitals, Centers for Health Development, Bureaus, Sanitaria, Rehabilitation Centers and attached agencies, as well as complaints ﬁled by any private individual or entity. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

1. Deﬁnition and Acronym as herein used as follows: 

1.1. IDC - refers to the Integrity Development Committee of the Central Ofﬁce or of the Center for Health Development. 
1.2. DOH-CO — refers to the Department of Health Central Ofﬁce 
1.3. IAB — refers to the Internal Affairs Board, a sub-committee of the Department of Health Integrity Development Committee of the Central Ofﬁce. 
1.4. Director — refers to the head of ofﬁce of a Center for Health Development (CHD), retained or re-nationalized hospital, ofﬁce bureau, rehabilitation center or head of ofﬁce of a DOH attached agency. 
1.5. Chief of Hospital/Medical Center Chief (COH/MCC) - refers to the Chief of a retained or re-nationalized Department of Health Hospital or Medical Center. 
1.6. Chief of Medical Professional Staff/Chief of Clinics — refers to the senior head medical ofﬁcer of the hospital. 
1.7. AHFFC — refers to the Ad Hoc Fact Finding Committee created to conduct fact ﬁnding investigation created by the Head of Agency for complaints which are not under oath and with veriﬁable information. 
1.8. Formal Charge (FC) — refers to the formal complaint leveled against a public ofﬁcia

V. PROCESS AND PROCEDURE 

1. Process of handling complaints ﬁled against those with positions lower than Chief of Medical Professional Staff/Chief of Clinics, Chief Administrative Ofﬁcers, and Chief in all rehabilitation centers under supervision by a Center for Health Development concerned. retained/re-nationalized hospitals/medical centers, sanitaria, and 

1.1 Complaint received (COH/MCC). 

1.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (COH/MCC) — within 24 hours from receipt by the COH/MCC. 

1.2.1 With no veriﬁable information —— forward to IAB for reporting to IDC and ﬁling. 

1.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath — create Fact Finding Committee (FFC) with one (1) hospital IDC member as member of the FFC. FFC should be composed of at least 3 members with one member serving as the Chair. 

1.2.3 If complaint is under oath — proceed to preliminary investigation. 

1.3 Preliminary Investigation (CHD Legal Ofﬁcer). 

1.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

1.3.2 With prima facie case — recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

1.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (COHX'MCC) — within 7 days from receipt of the recommendation. 

1.5 Hearing ofthe Case (CHD Hearing Committee). 

1.6 Approval of the Decision (COH/MCC) —~—_ within 7 calendar days from submission of recommendation by the Hearing Committee. 

1.6.1 Motion for reconsideration may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt by the respondent ofthe decision. 

1.7 Appeal (Secretary of Health). 

1.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt of the denial ofthe motion for reconsideration. 

1.7.2 The penalty of dismissal from the service, shall only take effect upon approval of the decision by the Secretary of Health. 

2. Process of handling complaints ﬁled against Chief of Medical Professional Staff/Chief of Clinics, Chief Administrative Ofﬁcers, and Chief Nurse in all retained/re—nationalized hospitals/medical centers, sanitaria, and rehabilitation centers under supervision by a Center for Health Development concerned. 

2.1 Complaint received (COH/MCC). 

2.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (COH/MCC) ~— within 24 hours from receipt by the COH/MCC. 

2.2.1 With no veriﬁable information 4 forward to IAB for reporting to IDC and ﬁling. 

2.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath — refer to the CHD Fact Finding Committee (FFC) with one (1) CHD IDC member as member of the FFC. FFC should be composed of at least 3 members with one member serving as the Chair. 

2.2.3 If complaint is under oath — proceed to preliminary investigation. 

2.3 Preliminary Investigation (CHD Legal Ofﬁcer) 

2.3.1 If no prima facie case - recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

2.3.2 With prima facie case - recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

2.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (COH/MCC) — within 7 days from receipt of the recommendation. 

2.5 Hearing ofthe Case (CHD Hearing Committee). 

2.6 Approval of the Decision (COH/MCC) — within 7 days from receipt of recommendation. 

2.6.1 Motion for reconsideration may be. ﬁled with the COH/MCC within 15 days from receipt by the respondent of the decision. 

2.7 Appeal (Secretary of Health). 

2.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt of the denial ofthe motion for reconsideration. 

2.7.2 The penalty of dismissal from the service, shall only take effect upon approval of the decision by the Secretary of Health. 

3. PRocess of handling complaints ﬁled against Chief of Medical Centers/Hospitals/Sanitaria/Rehab Centers under supervision by a Center for Health Development concerned. 

3.1 Complaint received (CHD Director). 

3.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (CHD Director) —— within 24 hours from receipt by the CHD Director. 

3.2.1 With no veriﬁable information —— Forward to IAB for reporting to IDC and ﬁling. 

3.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath - Refer to the CHD Fact Finding Committee (FFC) with one (1) CHD IDC member as member of the FFC. FFC should be composed of at least 3 members with one member serving as the Chair. 

3.2.3 If complaint is under oath — proceed to preliminary investigation. 

3.3 Preliminary Investigation (CHD Legal Ofﬁcer). 

3.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

3.3.2 With prima facie case — recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

3.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (CHD Director) — within 7 days from receipt of the recommendation. 

3.5 Hearing ofthe Case (CHD Hearing Committee). 

3.6 Approval of the Decision (Secretary of Health) —‘ within 7 calendar days from submission of recommendation by the Hearing Committee. 

3.6.1 Motion for reconsideration may be ﬁled with the Ofﬁce of the Secretary of Health within 15 days from receipt by the respondent ofthe decision. 

3.7 Appeal (CSC) 

3.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt of the denial of the motion for reconsideration. 

4. Process of handling complaints ﬁled against ofﬁcers and employees of Centers for 

Health Development lower than CHD Assistant Director. 

4.1 Complaint received (CHD Director). 

4.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (CHD Director) — within 24 hours from receipt by the CHD Director. 

4.2.1 With no veriﬁable information —- forward to IAB for reporting to IDC and ﬁling 

4.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath - refer to the CHD Fact Finding Committee (FFC) with one (1) CHD IDC member as member of the FFC. FFC should be composed of at least 3 members with one member serving as the Chair. 

4.2.3 If complaint is under oath - proceed to preliminary investigation. 

4.3 Preliminary Investigation (CHD Legal Ofﬁcer). 

4.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

4.3.2 With prima facie case ~ recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

4.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (CHD Director) — within 7 days from receipt of the recommendation. 

4.5 Hearing ofthe Case (CHD Hearing Committee). 

4.6 Approval of the Decision (CHD Director) — within 7 calendar days from submission of recommendation by the Hearing Committee. 

4.6.1 Motion for reconsideration may be ﬁled with the Ofﬁce of the CHD Director within 15 days from receipt by the respondent of the decision. 

4.7 Appeal (Secretary of Health). 

4.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt of the denial of the motion for reconsideration. 

4.7.2 The penalty of dismissal from the service, shall only take effect upon approval of the decision by the Secretary of Health. 

5. Process of handling complaints ﬁled against positions lower than Chief of Medical Professional Staff/Chief of Clinics, Chief Administrative Ofﬁcers, and ChiefNurse in all retained/re-nationalized hospitals/medical centers, sanitaria, rehabilitation centers, and Special Hospitals under supervision by the DOH—CO. 

5.1 Complaint received (COH/MCC). 

5.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (COH/MCC) — within 24 hours from receipt by the COH/MCC. 

5.2.1 With no veriﬁable information — forward to IAB for reporting to IDC and ﬁling. 

5.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath — create Fact Finding Committee (FFC) with one (1) hospital IDC member as member of the FFC. FFC should be composed of at least 3 members with one member serving as the Chair. 

5.2.3 If complaint is under oath — proceed to preliminary investigation. 

5.3 Preliminary Investigation (Legal Ofﬁcer). 

5.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the legal ofﬁcer 

5.3.2 With prima facie case — recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

5.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (COH/MCC) — within 7 days from receipt ofthe recommendation. 

5.5 Hearing ofthe Case (Hospital Hearing Committee). 

5.6 Approval of the Decision (COH/MCC) — within 7 calendar days from submission of recommendation by the Hearing Committee. 

5.6.1 Motion for reconsideration may be ﬁled with the COH/MCC within 15 days from receipt by the respondent ofthe decision. 

5.7 Appeal (Secretary of Health) 

5.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt of the denial ofthe motion for reconsideration. 

5.7.2 The penalty of dismissal from the service, shall only take effect upon approval of the decision by the Secretary of Health. ‘ 

6. Process of handling complaints ﬁled against Chief of Medical Professional Staff/Chief of Clinics, Chief Administrative Ofﬁcers, and Chief Nurse in all retained/re~nationalized hospitals/medical centers, sanitaria, rehabilitation centers, and Special Hospitals under supervision by the DOH-CO. 

6.1 Complaint received (IAB). 

6.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (IAB) — within 24 hours from receipt by the IAB. 

6.2.1 With no veriﬁable information — forward to IAB for reporting to IDC and ﬁling. 

6.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath — refer to IAS for fact ﬁnding investigation. 

6.2.3 If complaint is under oath — proceed to preliminary investigation. 

6.3 Preliminary Investigation (Legal Service) 

6.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

6.3.2 With prima facie case — recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading 

6.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (COH/MCC) — within 7 days from receipt of the recommendation. 

6.5 Hearing of the Case by the DOH Hearing Committee to be created by the IAB Chairperson Chaired by a lawyer from the Legal Service with two (2) members selected by the OSC, USEC/ASEC. 

6.6 Approval of the Decision (COH/MCC) m within 7 days from receipt of recommendation. 

6.6.1 Motion for reconsideration may be ﬁled with the COH/MCC within 15 days from receipt by the respondent ofthe decision. 

6.7 Appeal (Secretary of Health). 

6.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt of the denial ofthe motion for reconsideration. 

6.7.2 The penalty of dismissal from the service, shall only take effect upon approval of the decision by the Secretary of Health. 

7. Process of handling complaints ﬁled against Chief of Medical Centers/Hospitals/Sanitaria/Rehab Centers and Special Hospitals under supervision by the DOH-CO. 


7.1 Complaint received (IAB). 

7.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (IAB) — within 24 hours from receipt by the IAB. 

7.2.1 With no veriﬁable information - forward to IAB for reporting to IDC and ﬁling. 

7.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath — refer to IAS for fact ﬁnding investigation. 

7.2.3 If complaint is under oath — proceed to preliminary investigation. 

7.3 Preliminary Investigation (Legal Service). 

7.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

7.3.2 With prima facie case - recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

7.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (USEC/ASEC, Ofﬁce of Special Concern (OSC)) —- within 7 days from receipt of the recommendation. 

7.5 Hearing of the case by the DOH Hearing Committee to be created by the IAB Chairperson Chaired by a lawyer from the Legal Service with two (2) members selected by the USEC/ASEC of OSC. 

7.6 Approval of the Decision (Secretary of Health) — within 7 days from receipt of recommendation. . 

7.6.1 Motion for reconsideration may be ﬁled with the Ofﬁce of the Secretary within 15 days from receipt by the respondent ofthe decision. 

7.7 Appeal (CSC). 

7.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt of the denial of the motion for reconsideration. 

8. Process of handling complaints for DOH Central Ofﬁce Units including BOQ & BFAD Division Chiefs and below. 

8.1 Complaint received (IDC). 

8.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (IAB ofthe IDC). 

8.2.1 With no veriﬁable information —— archive with IAB Records for reporting to IDC. 

8.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath — Internal Audit Service (IAS) to conduct Fact Finding or Secretary of Health (SOH) may create AHFFC w/ IAS as member. 

8.2.3 If complaint is under oath —— proceed to preliminary investigation. 

8.3 Preliminary Investigation (Legal Service). 

8.3.1 If no prima facie case - recommend dismissal of complaint within 7days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

8.3.2 With prima facie case - recommend ﬁling of a formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the legal ofﬁce of the last responsive pleading. 

8.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (Bureau/Service/Ofﬁce Director c0ncerned) — within 7 days from receipt of the recommendation. 

8.5 Hearing of the case (Hearing Committee, to be created by the Internal Affairs Board (IAB) Chairperson, to be chaired by a lawyer from Legal Service with two members to be selected by the Cluster Head of the respondent.) 

8.6 Approval of the Decision (Appointing Authority) —- within 7 days from receipt of recommendation. 

8.6.1 Motion for Reconsideration may be ﬁled within 15 days from receipt by the respondent of the decision. 

8.7 Appeal (Secretary of Health). 

8.7.1 Appeal may be ﬁled within 15 days from the receipt of the denial ofthe Motion for Reconsideration 

9. Process of handling complaints for all Presidential Appointees in the DOH Central Ofﬁce/CHDs, except Undersecretary (USEC) and Assistant Secretary (ASEC). 

9.1 Complaint received (IDC). 

9.2 Initial evaluation of complaint (IAB ofthe IDC). 

9.2.1 With no veriﬁable information — archive with IAB Records for reporting to IDC. 

9.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath -- IAS to conduct Fact Finding or Secretary of Health may create an AHFFC with IAS as member. 

9.2.3 If complaint is under oath - proceed to preliminary investigation. 

9.3 Preliminary Investigation (Legal Service). 

9.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

9.3.2 With prima facie case _. recommend endorsement to PAGC/OMB for the ﬁling of formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

9.4 Approval of Appropriate Action (Secretary of Health) - within 7 days from receipt ofthe recommendation. 

10. Process of handling complaints for Assistant Secretary (ASEC) and Undersecretary of Health (USEC). 

10.1 Complaint received (SOH). 

10.2 Initial evaluation (SOH/IDC). 

10.2.1 With no veriﬁable information- forward to IAB for ﬁling. 

10.2.2 With veriﬁable information but not under oath- Secretary of Health to create AHFFC with IAS member. 

10.2.3 If complaint is under oath— proceed to Preliminary Investigation by Legal Service. 

10.3 Preliminary Investigation by the Legal Service. ,. 

10.3.1 If no prima facie case — recommend dismissal of complaint within 7 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer. 

10.3.2 With prima facie case — recommend endorsement to PAGC/OMB for the ﬁling of formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

10.3.2 With prima facie case - recommend endorsement to PAGC/OMB for the ﬁling of formal charge within 30 days from receipt by the Legal Ofﬁcer of the last responsive pleading. 

10.4 Approval of the Preliminary Investigation report by Secretary of Health. 

VI. SEPARABILITY AND REPEALING CLAUSE 

All other issuances of this Department not in conformity with this Administrative Order and the Uniform Rules on Administrative Cases in the Civil Service (URACCS) as per Omnibus Rules Implementing Book V of Executive Order No. 292 are hereby repealed. 

VII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Administrative Order shall take effect after ﬁfteen (15) days following the completion of its publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette or in two (2) newspapers of general circulation. 
</body>

<sign>FRANCISCO DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 

