Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue 
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines 
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-9502, 711-9503 and 781-4362 ; Telefax No. (632) 743-1829 

 

 

<date>22 September, 2009</date>

 
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>2009-0017</docnum> 

<subject>Subject: Interim Guidelines for the Rendition of Quarantine Services and Quarantine Personnel Assignment Applicable to Offshore Operations Areas/Locations within the Philippines </subject>

<body>
I. Rationale: 

In view of the service contract entered into by the Republic of the Philippines as represented by the Department of Energy with Petroleum Service Contractors for the exploration and development of petroleum products in offshore areas; 

The Bureau of Quarantine, Department of Health needs to assign and deploy personnel thereat to provide necessary quarantine services such as inspection of vessels, the surveillance over sanitary conditions as well as over cargo, ' passengers, crew and all personal effects and the issuance of quarantine certificates, bills of health or equivalent documents as mandated by RA 9271, 

Deployment of such quarantine personnel in a remote and dangerous offshore oil platforms needs to be provided with adequate compensation to cover for insurances, remote duty and other hazard benefits; 

Additionally, there is a need to establish a guidelines and procedures in order to facilitate the rates for reasonable compensation per assigned quarantine personnel beyond their prescribed duties and responsibilities in offshore operation that is acgeptable and agreed upon by the concern parties. Such compensation for services rendered is allowed under Section 17 of the implementing Rules and Regulation (AD. 186 $2004] 

II. Scope: 

The Scope ofthis Order shall cover quarantine services associated with offshore operations within the country. 

III. Objectives: 

This order is promulgated to provide an interim set of guidelines and procedures governing the rendition ofquarantine services applicable to offshore operation. 

IV. Definition of Terms: 

Service Contract - Contract entered into by the Department of Energy of the Philippines with Oil Contractors for the exploration ofthe South Sulu Sea. 

Petroleum Service Contractor- Private Party contracted by the Government for oil exploration. 

Offshore Operation- remote oil exploration site at sea. 

Quarantine Personnel- Quarantine Medical Officers, Nurses or Allied Medical personnel representing the Bureau onuarantine. 

RA 9271- The Quarantine Act 0f2004. 

Rate for the Rendition of Quarantine Services- reasonable compensation for the assigned quarantine personnel, acceptable and agreed upon by the Bureau of Quarantine and the Petroleum Service Contractor. 

V. Interim Guidelines: 

a] The Director of Quarantine or his duly designated representative shall have the power to sign and deploy quarantine personnel to render services in connection with Offshore Operation within the Philippines. Such agreement shall be covered by appropriate Personnel Order setting forth the duration of the assignment and other relevant terms and conditions, as well as any limitation on the power and function of the personnel assigned. 

b] The individual rates of quarantine services to be rendered for Offshore Operations in connection with each Service Contract within the Philippines shall be subject of a separate appropriate Memorandum Orders or Order promulgated by the Bureau of Quarantine Director in accordance with applicable laws and regulation and communicated to the representatives of the other members of the Coordinating Bureaus. Such rates shall take into account the unique circumstances applicable to the particular Offshore Operations. Concerns, issues and queries regarding such rates or their application shall be considered among the Coordinating Bureaus in collaboration with the Department of Energy. 

c] Nothing herein shall diminish the authority or responsibility of the Bureau of Quarantine under applicable laws, rules and regulations. The Bureau of Quarantine shall retain full discretion to grant permits, clearances, certiﬁcations and other bills of health and take such other aCtion within the regulatory mandate 

d] Any Bureau of Quarantine personnel who violates any of the provision of this Order shall be subject to disciplinary action consistent with existing civil service laws and regulations and any contractor who fails to comply or violates any provision hereof shall be subject to fines and penalties provided for by existing law, rules and regulations 

e] All existing auditing rules and regulations shall apply. 


VI. Separability Clause: 

In the event that any provision of this order is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court ofcompetent jurisdiction, other provision thereof Shall not be affected.- 

VII. Repealing Clause: 

All administrative orders and other issuances or part thereof inconsistent with the provision of this order are hereby rescinded or repealed or amended or modified accordingly. 

VIII. 

Effe ctivity: 

This order shall take effect immediately. 

Let sufficient copies of this Order be filed with the Office of the National Administrative Register (ON AR), UP Law center, University of the Philippines, Diliman, Quezon City. 
</body>
 
<sign>FRANCISCO DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 
