Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>January 6, 2010 </date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2010 -0006 </docnum>


<subject>Subject: Amendment to Administrative Order No. 2009-0022 - Guidelines on the Determination of Funds for Transfer to Local Government Units Year 2010 </subject>



<body>
Administrative Order No. 2009-0022 is hereby amended to reﬂect the following changes identiﬁed in bold letters: 

Section IV. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

1. The Province-wide Investment Plan for Health (PIPH) and its Annual Operations Plan (AOP), approved facility maps for Basic and Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric Care (BEmONCs/CEmONCs) and the approved Provincial Rationalization Plans and Implementation Plan of said Provincial Rationalization Plans shall be the basis for sub—allotment/ transfer to CHDs and LGUs. The MOA covering the PIPH and its AOP signed by the Secretary of Health and the Governor for the past and current year shall be the legal basis for all transfers except for LGUs that have yet to develop their PIPH. In transition, transfers to LGUs without PIPH shall be covered by a separate MOA entered into between the Secretary of Health and the Governor or City Mayor. 

Section V. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES 

2.e. All Capital Outlay (CO) funds shall be allocated to LGU-owned health facilities and to priority DOH, Philippine National Police (PNP) and military health facilities. 

3. Provincial Ceilings shall be determined by the different units in /charge of priority budget line items from the funds to leverage LGU performance. 

Except for the Health Facilities Enhancement Program, provincial budget ceilings shall be set for the above—mentioned budget line items using indicators such as target population, poverty, and bed to population ratio as weights. Budget ceilings referred under this section shall pertain to MOOE for leveraging LGU performance. 

Determination of provincial budget ceilings for MOOE to leverage LGU performance will be as follows: ' 

e. Health Facilities Enhancement Program: Funds for health facilities upgrading shall be allocated: . 

i) To augment the Family Health budget in funding the upgrading of existing/ establish new health facilities (BemONCs/CEmONCs) in accordance with the approved facility maps and the necessary blood service facilities. This is in line with the attainment of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) to reduce Maternal Mortality Ratio. 

ii) To provide ﬁnancial assistance for the upgrading/establishment of LGU health facilities in selected provinces with approved Provincial Rationalization Plans and Implementation Plan of their Provincial Rationalization Plan (linked to AOP of PIPH). 

iii) To provide ﬁnancial assistance to selected LGUs for upgrading of priority Rural Health Units to improve their gate-keeping function based on the Provincial Rationalization Plans. 

iv) To provide ﬁnancial assistance to selected LGUs for upgrading of priority LGU Level 1 and Level 2 Hospitals based on Provincial Rationalization Plans. 

v) To provide funds for the upgrading of DOH Level 1 and Level 2 Hospitals. 

vi) To provide funds for the establishment of priority Specialty Centers (Cancer Center, Geriatric Center, Trauma Center, and additional Regional Heart, Lung, Kidney Center) 

vii) To provide funds for the completion of Foreign Assisted DOH Hospital Projects 

viii) To provide funds for the completion of priority DOH Hospital Projects to comply with structural and non-structural standards for Hospitals Safe from Disasters 

ix) To provide funds to assist the PNP and the military in upgrading their existing health facilities 

The rest of the provisions under 3e as well as the relevant annex on Indicative Provincial Ceilings under the Health Facilities Enhancement Program are hereby repealed. 

A Department Order aligned to this issuance and to describe the details of the implementation of the Health Facilities Enhancement Program shall be issued. 

All other previsions of AO No. 2009- 0022 not affected by this amendment shall remain in force. 
</body>

<sign>FRANCISCO DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 

 

