Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>SEP 15, 2011</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2011 - 0014 </docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Certiﬁcation of Health Facilities with Basic Emergency Obstetrics and Newborn Care (BEmONC) Capacity</subject>


<body>
1. RATIONALE 

The strategy of encouraging mothers to give birth in adequately-equipped primary level facilities such that they can be attended by skilled health professionals is the current consensus towards a more effective approach to address high maternal and neonatal mortality rates in the country. It seeks to establish in every province, a network of health facilities that can provide cost-effective basic emergency obstetric and neonatal care where all women should have acCess to high quality pre—natal, delivery and post-partum care including access to referral services for obstetric complications. 

Certiﬁcation standards from a certifying body in the DOH assure health provider safety and conﬁdence on the implementation of standards that have a clear scope of practice which cannot be compromised. The standards set for the practice of professional health care providers, equipment and ”infrastructure service requirements developed through a participatory process for purposes of certiﬁcation can be further linked to an accreditation process of health facilities with an incentive scheme. ' 

Thru a certiﬁcation process, the health professionals are expected to have the requisite knowledge and skills in providing quality, culturally relevant, appropriate care for women, newborn and child—bearing families. It places critical emphasis on both personal professional accountability coupled with the adoption of health infrastructure benchmark for well-equipped and functional health facilities to handle emergency obstetric and neonatal cases brought to their care. 

This Administrative Order is hereby issued to establish a certiﬁcation process which shall be the service standard for health facilities with skilled health professionals providing basic emergency obstetrics and newborn care. 

II. DECLARATION OF POLICY 

This issuance complements the provisions of (1) Administrative Order No. 2008—0029 on Health Reforms for the Rapid Reduction of Maternal and Neonatal Mortality, (2) AdministratiVe Order No. 2009—0025 on Adopting New Policies and Protoc'ol on Essential Newborn Care Protocol and (3) Administrative Order No. 2010—0014 on Administration of Life-Saving Drugs and Medicines by Midwives to Rapidly Reduce Maternal and Neonatal Morbidity and Mortality. 

III. OBJECTIVES 

In general, this policy and guide aims to ensure the appropriate provision of quality care for emergency obstetrics and newborn care in the country. Speciﬁcally, it aims to: 

(1) Ensure quality assurance, public protection and safety in the delivery of maternal and newborn health care services; and  

(2) Guide health care providers on professional standards of care for emergency obstetrics and neonatal care to promote the compliance/adherence to facility—based deliveries 

IV. SCOPE OF APPLICATION 

This Order shall apply to all national, regional and local government public health facilities that are recipients of national government support with the Health Facilities Enhancement Program (HFEP) of the DOH linked to the Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) convergence sites and all relevant stakeholders whose functions and activities contribute to the delivery and provision of Basic Emergency Obstetrics and Newborn Care (BEmONC) services nationwide. 

V. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

1. Basic Emergency Obstertric and Newborn Care (BEmONC) — capable network of facilities and providers that can perform the following six signal obstetric functions: (1) parenteral administration of oxytocin in the third stage of labor; (2) parenteral administration of loading dose of anti-convulsants; (3) parenteral administration of initial dose of antibiotics; (4) performance of assisted deliveries (Imminent Breech Delivery); (5) removal of retained products of conception; and (6) manual removal of retained placenta. These facilities are also able to provide emergeny newborn interventions, which include the minimum: (1) newborn resuscitation; (2) treatment of neonatal sepsis/infection; and (3) oxygen support. It shall also be capable of providing blood transfusion services on top of its standard functions. 

2. BEmONC Capable Facility - a health facility that can either be a primary/district hospital, RHU operating 24/7 or an RHU/BHS that operate on an on—call basis after regular ofﬁce/ clinic hours. Such facilities can be certiﬁed by the DOH after meeting the standard requirements for certiﬁcation. 

3. CCT Convergence Site - cities or municipalities within a province that have been identiﬁed by the National Household Targeting System of the DSWD as recipients of the FOUR P’s Program of the Department of Social Welfare and Development. 

4. Certiﬁcation- A process and procedure of external assessment or examination by which an individual or facility is determined to possess a minimally acceptable body of knowledge and/or skills with the capacity to provide the standards of care with adequate resources which includes drugs, supplies, standard equipment and physical infrastructure. 

5. Skilled Health Professional— duly licensed practicing health care professionals which include doctors, nurses and midwives 

VI. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

1. Certiﬁcation Process 

Each health facility shall apply for certiﬁcation with the Centers for Health Development of the DOH within their respective area or jurisdiction and ensure compliance to technical standard requirements upon application. A Certiﬁcate of Compliance shall be conferred by the CHD to a BEmONC capable facility that meets the following requirements: 

1.1 Public health facilities shall operate 24/7 and have been upgraded under the Health Facilities Enhancement Program (HFEP) of the DOH with the provision of the standard equipment and health facility infrastructure to ﬁinction as a BEmONC capable facility 

1.2 Have a staff complement trained as BEmONC teams composed of a doctor, nurse and midwife that have undergone the competency based BEmONC training in a DOH designated training center and issued a Certiﬁcate of Attendance as skilled health professionals 

A Certiﬁcate of Compliance issued by the Centers for Health Development shall be valid for one year. 

2. Regional Team of Assessors 

The Centers for Health Development shall establish an adequate number of staff to constitute the regional team of assessors who will validate the compliance of the health facility to BEMONC service standards applying for BEmONC Certiﬁcation. The team of assessors shall submit their recommendation upon validation to the regional director who will approve the Certificate. of Compliance for those health facilities that meet the certification standards. 

3. Maternity Care Package (MCP) 

The accreditation of BEmONC capable facilities shall be linked to the Maternity Care Package developed by the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) for District Hospitals (DH), Rural Health Units (RHUS) and Barangay Health Stations (BHS). 

The Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) shall grant accreditation upon application of the health facilities without the need for a pre-accreditation survey. It shall be subject to the health facility’s compliance to requirements as prescribed jointly by the DOH and PHIC with the issuance of the following: (1) Certiﬁcate of Attendance to trainings conducted by the Department of Health for BEmONC skilled health professionals and (2) Certiﬁcate of Compliance by the DOH- Centers for Health Development (CHD) for complying with health facility standards for BEmONC. 

 

VII. REPEALING CLAUSE 

All other Orders and related issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this issuance is hereby repealed and rescinded. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect immediately. 
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD, FPCS, FAC</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


