Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>05/28/2012</date>

<docnum>No. 2012 - 0007</docnum>

<subject> 
SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE GRANT OF TWENTY PERCENT (20%) DISCOUNT TO SENIOR CITIZENS ON HEALTH RELATED GOODS AND SERVICES AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES.
</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE:

The proportion of older persons is expected to rise worldwide. In the 1998 World Health Report, there were 390 million older people and this ﬁgure is expected to increase further (WHO). This growth will certainly pose a challenge to country governments, particularly to the developing countries in caring for their aging population. In the Philippines, the population of 60 years or older was 3.7 million in 1995 or 5.4% of total population. In the CY 2000 census, this has increased to about 4.8 million or almost 6% (N SCB). At present there are 7M senior a (6.9% of the total population), 1.3M of which are indigents. 

With the rise of the aging population is the increase in the demand for health services by the elderly. A study done by Racelis et a1 (2003) on the share of health expenditure of Filipino elderly on the National Health Account, the elderly are "relatively heavy consumers of personal health care (22%) and relatively light consumers of public health care (5%)." From out-of-pocket costs, the aged are heavy users of care provided by medical centers, hospitals, non-hospital health facilities and traditional care facilities.

Cognizant of the growing concerns of the older population, laws and policies were developed which would provide them with enabling mechanisms for them to have quality life. RA 9257 or the Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2003 (predecessor of RA 9994) provided for the expansion of coverage of beneﬁts and privileges that the elderly may acquire, including medically necessary services. Parallel to this objective is the Department's desire to provide affordable and quality healthservices to the marginalized population, especially the elderly, without impeding currently pursued objectives alongside health systems reform.

II. OBJECTIVES:

This Order is being issued pursuant to Section 9 of R. A. 9994 otherwise known as “The Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010” to achieve the following objectives:

1. To provide fair, just and quality health care for the senior population, at the same time pursuing ﬁnancial viability of hospitals amidst economic and ﬁnancial constraints.

2. To establish guidelines and mechanisms in implementing the 20% Senior Citizens' discount on health related sale of goods and services and for other purposes.

III. SCOPE AND APPLICATION

This order shall apply to the whole hierarchy of the DOH and its attached agencies, as well as Local Government Units (LGUs) and other public and private providers of health care. It applies to all hospitals and health—related facilities from the government and private sectors, the health care professionals and other related health care facilities and services. This also applies to drug stores, hospital pharmacies and similar establishment dispensing medicines
and medical devices.

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS

Consistent with the pertinent deﬁnitions used in the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA 9994, the following terms shall be deﬁned as follows:

1. Senior Citizen or Elderly— shall refer to any Filipino citizen who is a resident of the
Philippines, and who is sixty (60) years old or above. It may apply to senior citizens with "dual citizenship" status provided they prove their Filipino citizenship and they have been residents for at least six (6) months in the Philippines.

It shall also include senior citizens who are recipients of the DSWD National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction Program and/or those classiﬁed under. Administrative Order No. Sl-A s. 2001, Implementing Guidelines on Classiﬁcation of Patients and on Availment of Medical Social Services in Government Hospitals.

2.Medicines— shall refer to both prescription and non—prescription medicines and articles approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), intended for use in the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment and prevention of disease and injury but do not include food and devices or their components, parts or accessories.

3.Medical Devices- shall refer to instruments, apparatus, machines, implants or in vitro reagents intended for use in, or actually used in the diagnosis, treatment, monitoring or prevention of disease or injury and does not achieve any of the intended purposes by means of chemical action within or on humans and not dependent on being metabolized to achieve as a result.

4. Medical Services - in the context of this Administrative Order, this shall refer to hospital room and services, medical supplies, professional services of physicians and other health care professionals, and diagnostic and laboratory tests that are necessary for the diagnosis and/or treatment of an illness or injury.

5. Dental Services - shall refer to the services related to oral examination, cleaning,	permanent and temporary ﬁlling, extractions and gum treatments, restoration, replacement or repositioning of teeth, or alteration of the alveolar or periodontium process of the maxilla and the mandible that are necessary for the diagnosis and/or treatment of a dental illness or injury.

6. Diagnostic And Laboratory Tests - shall refer to X-ray, CT-scans, blood chemistry exams, histopathology and immune pathology, hematology, urine analysis, parasitology and bacteriology tests, serology, blood banking and all other diagnostic radiology, clinical laboratory and other diagnostic examinations that are necessary for the diagnosis and for treatment of an illness or injury. For specialized diagnostics, this should be appropriate to the disease/injury.

7. Health Care Professional - shall refer to any doctor of medicine, nurse, midwife, dentist or other health care professional or practitioners i.e. nutritionists, psychologists, counselors, patient educators duly licensed to practice in the Philippines.

8. Establishments Dispensing Medicines - shall refer to drug stores, hospital pharmacies (government or private), medical and optical clinics and similar establishments dispensing medicines, duly licensed and/or franchised by the FDA and the local govemment units.

9. Government Health Facilities — shall refer to hospitals, outpatient clinics including health centers and rural health units, clinical laboratories, diagnostic radiology centers, and other outpatient health facilities operated and maintained partially or wholly by the national, provincial, city or municipal government, or other political unit; or by any department; division, board or agency thereof. The facilities include Department of Health (DOH)-retained hospitals; specialty hospitals which are govemment-owned and controlled corporations (GOCCs); medical clinics in GOCC; and hospitals/health facilities owned and managed by local government units, state colleges and universities, the Department of National Defense, the Department of Interior and Local Government, and other government agencies.

The government hospitals consist of the service or charity or subsidized inpatient and outpatient section/department and the non-subsidized pay section.

Private Hospitals And Medical Facilities — shall refer to all pay inpatient and outpatient health and medical facilities privately owned, established and operated with ﬁinds through donation, principal, investment, or other means, by any individual, corporation, association, or organization. The facilities include hospitals, clinical laboratories, diagnostic radiology centers, doctor's clinics, dental clinics and other health facilities that are licensed by the Bureau of Health Facilities and Services (BHFS) of the DOH and/or local government units.

11. Identiﬁcation Document - shall refer to any document or proof 'of being a senior citizen which shall be used for the availment of beneﬁts and privileges under the law, such as
the following:

a) ID issued by the city or municipal mayor of Ofﬁce of Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) or of the barangay captain of the place where the senior citizen or the elderly resides;

b) The passport of the elderly person or senior citizen concerned; and

c) Other documents or government issued certiﬁcates such as birth certiﬁcate, voter's ID that establish the senior citizen or elderly person is a citizen of the Republic and who is at least sixty (60) years of age

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES

Subject to the provisions of RA 9994, its implementing rules and regulations, this Order and the availability of the medicines and services, the health-related privileges for senior citizens and their sources of funding of the privileges shall be as follows:

1. Subsidized Services in In-patient and Out-patient Sections of Government Health
Facilities:

Fully subsidized (free) medical and dental services, and diagnostic and laboratory fees for all senior citizens conﬁned in service wards of government facilities shall be provided in accordance with available Clinical Practice Guidelines or Hospital Treatment Protocols, and therefore, medically necessary/indicated (that is, the patient was assessed by a doctor and the request for a laboratory/diagnostic exam/s was made and signed by the said doctor).

2. Non-subsidized Services in Pay Sections of Government Health Facilities

Medical and dental services, diagnostic and laboratory fees and professional fees of attending physicians and other health professionals for all senior citizens conﬁned in pay sections (both in— and out— patient sections) of govermnent health facilities shall be granted twenty percent (20%) discount and VAT exemption, provided these are in accordance with available Clinical Practice Guidelines or Hospital Treatment Protocols, and therefore, medically necessary.

3. Twenty Percent (20%.) discount in Private Health Facilities

All senior citizens shall be granted the privilege of twenty percent (20%) discount and VAT exemption on medical and dental services, and diagnostic and laboratory fees such as but a limited to x-rays, computerized tomography scans and blood tests, including professional fees of attending doctors in all private hospitals and medical facilities.

The services shall include the use of specialized treatment rooms and equipment such as for hemodialysis and radiotherapy.

4. Exclusion to the SC DiscOunt (no discount) in Government Health Facilities and
Private Health Facilities 


Services that are not medically necessary for treatment and diagnosis shall not be provided with any discount. This shall include but not limited to cosmetic surgeries procedures, executive check-up packages and physical examinations, without clinical evidence of effectiveness and efﬁciency. Senior citizens who avail of health services in government health facilities shall be classiﬁed in accordance with A0 Sl-A s. 2000. 

Senior citizens who are classiﬁed Class A and B shall be given 20% discount and VAT exemption for special reagents, dyes, contrast media, and radioactive isotopes used in laboratory and diagnostic tests. Senior citizens who are classiﬁed Class C and D shall be given full discount and VAT exemption.

5. Geriatric/Senior Citizens' Wards

Throughout the country a senior Citizens' ward shall be established in every government hospital. This geriatric ward shall be for the exclusive use of senior citizens who are in need of hospital conﬁnement by reason of their health conditions. However, when urgency of public necessity or emergency purposes so require, such geriatric ward may be used for emergency purposes, after which, such senior Citizens' ward shall be reverted to its nature as geriatric ward.

Initially, when the facility still does not have the necessary space for a geriatric/senior citizens' ward, beds may be prioritized for the use of SCs who will be admitted.

6. Medical Devices

6.1 All medical devices (implants, supplies, kits, equipment including the use of radiation devices, dental, and laboratory, hospital implement or apparatus) used/consumed during check-up or conﬁnement of a senior citizen regardless of the number of days of stay in the hospital or any health facilities shall be covered by the twenty percent (20%) discount and VAT exemption.

6.2 All medical devices to be used during the recovery at home, or for monitoring of a particular ailment or disease, or to aid the maintenance of a treatment shall also be covered by the 20% discount and VAT exemption provided that the prescription for the use of a particular medical device shall be provided by the physician (e.g. cane, crutches, adult diaper, wheelchair, commode chair, bed pan, body support, fracture sock, medical support stockings, oxygen therapy unit (gauge and tank set), IV ﬂuid and stand, forcep, swabs, hospital bed, walker, urine bag, bandage, hearing aid, eyeglasses, intraocular pen injector, hot/ cold pack, therapeutic massager, therapeutic mattress/ pad, all prosthesis, catheter, therapeutic warmer, glucometer set including lancets and test strips, insulin syringe and needle, thermometer, blood pressure apparatus, syringe and needles, IV set, dialyzer, adhesive strip, mask, gauze, gloves, dressing, cotton, brace, and other devices subject to clearance from the Center for Device Regulation, Radiation Health and Research (CDRRHR).

6.2 The twenty percent (20%) discount and VAT exemption shall apply to the purchase of eyeglasses, hearing aids, dentures, prosthetics, artiﬁcial bone replacements like steel and which includes implants, plates, rods, and screws. The same discount and exemption shall also apply to walkers, crutches, wheelchairs whether manual or electric-powered, canes, geriatric diapers, and other essential medical supplies accessories and equipment for senior citizens.

6.3 The twenty percent (20%) discount and VAT exemption shall apply only once on the purchase for personal use of senior citizen of non-disposable medical devices (e. g. glucometer, blood pressure apparatus, weighing scale).

6.5 Purchase of any medical devices granted the twenty percent (20%) discount and VAT . exemption shall be recorded in the Purchase Booklet for control and monitoring.

7. Professional Fees

Professional fees of licensed health professionals including massage therapists, psychologists, speech therapists, nurse, midwife, dentist or other health care professional or practitioner i.e. nutritionists, psychologists, counselors, patient educators duly licensed to practice in the Philippines in all private hospitals, medical facilities and outpatient clinics and home health care facilities shall be subject to the twenty percent (20%) discount and VAT exemption.

All senior citizens shall be granted the twenty percent (20%) discount and exemption from the VAT on the professional fees of licensed professional health workers providing home health care services as endorsed by private hospitals or employed through home health care employment agencies.

8. Mandatory PhilHealth Coverage

All indigent senior citizens shall be covered by the national health insurance program of PhilHealth. The local government units where the indigent senior citizens reside shall allocate the necessary funds to ensure the enrollment and lifetime coverage of their indigent senior citizens, in accordance with the pertinent laws and regulations.

PhilHealth shall also explore the inclusion of beneﬁt packages speciﬁc to the senior citizens.

9. Influenza and Pneumococcal Vaccinations The DOH shall administer free vaccinations against the inﬂuenza virus and pneumococcal disease for indigent senior citizen patients. Neglected, abandoned, unattached or homeless senior citizens in government-run residential homes, centers and facilities shall likewise be entitled to free vaccinations.

10. Funding Sources

10.1 For Government: The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of RA 9994 in government health facilities upon its effectivity shall be charged out of the funds of the concerned DOH or LGU health facility. Thereafter, any such sum as needed for the regular implementation of this Act shall be included in the subsequent General Appropriations Act under the DOH line item. Each hospital and CHDs shall also allocate at least1% of their MOOE for this purpose.

Local Governments Units shall be encouraged to allocate funds for the provision of additional beneﬁts of the senior citizens in their lecality.

 

10.2 For Private: For the twenty percent (20%) discount in private establishments, the cost of the discount shall be partially funded through the deduction of the discount from gross income for the same taxable year that the discount is granted, subject to proper documentation and to the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended. The rest of the cost of the discount not funded through the above- described manner shall be borne by the provider of the privileges.

VI. PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES

1. Government Health Facilities

1.1 Subsidized Services in In-patient and Out—patient Sections of Government Health Facilities:

a. A hospital bed in a service ward that is deemed medically necessary to diagnose and treat an illness or injury in accordance with the available Clinical Practice Guidelines(CPGs) or hospital treatment protocols shall be granted free (fully subsidized) to the senior citizen. This shall be charged to the hospital budget.

b. Laboratories and diagnostics services provided to an inpatient senior citizen in a service ward that are medically necessary/indicated (that is, the patient was assessed by a doctor and the request for a laboratory /diagnostic exam/s was made and signed by the said doctor) as determined by his/her attending physician, shall be fully subsidized (free) subject to the following:

- Diagnosis and/or treatment by the attending physician shall be in accordance with the available Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) or Hospital Treatment Protocols

- Evidence-based health screening tests that had been extensively tested for the local setting and endorsed by the DOH as medically necessary for individual cases shall be provided free (fully subsidized) by the government facility.

c. All inpatient labOratories and diagnostics provided to senior citizens admitted to a bed in the service ward which are deemed not medical necessary for the illness or injury for which he/she is conﬁned shall only be granted a 20% discount.

d. Free laboratory and diagnostic services shall be granted to an outpatient senior citizen, provided the following are met:

- Diagnosis and/or treatment by the attending physicians shall be in accordance with the available Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) or Hospital Treatment Protocols and have been determined
medically necessary.

- Evidence—based health screening tests that had been extensively tested for the local-setting and endorsed by the DOH as medically necessary for individual cases and shall be provided free by the government health facility.

- The laboratory and diagnostic services have been determined by his/her attending physician as medically necessary.

- The requesting physician is a government-employed physician in the same government health facility where the laboratory or diagnostic tests shall be conducted.

All outside requests for laboratory and diagnostic tests from physicians who are not employed by the government facility and are based in either a government or private health facility shall only be granted a 20% discount upon ﬁnal evaluation of the recipient government facility as medically necessary.

The attending dentist of the senior citizen shall make the determination as to the medical necessity of the dental service that will then be granted free.

In case the senior citizen is a PhilHealth member or a dependent, government health facilities must ensure that the charges for services not included in the subsidized services shall be deducted and charged to the senior citizen's PhilHealth beneﬁts coverage. It is only after these deductions are made that the PhilHealth accredited health facilities can exercise its right to PhilHealth reimbursement or coverage for the subsidized services.

1.2 Non-subsidized Services in Pay Sections of Government Health Facilities

The following enumerates the medically necessary care levels for the diagnosis and/or treatment of an illness or injury that shall be granted twenty percent (20%) discount and shall apply to pay sections of government health facilities:

a) A hospital bed in pay sections of government health facilities is deemed medically necessary to diagnose and treat an illness or injury in accordance with the available
Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) or Hospital Treatment Protocols. This shall be charged to the senior citizen and granted 20% discount.

b. All inpatient and outpatient laboratory and diagnostic examinations in pay sections shall be granted 20% discount; provided that such diagnosis and/or treatment by the attending physicians shall be in accordance with the available Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) or hospital treatment protocols.

The health facilities shall designate medical ofﬁcers for senior citizens (MOSC) to facilitate the determination of the medical necessity of requested laboratory or 1 diagnostic examinations.

 
c) All inpatient laboratories and diagnostics that are provided to senior citizens admitted to a bed beyond the service ward level shall only be granted a 20% discount.

d) In case the senior citizen is a PhilHealth member or dependent, the 20% discount shall not be charged to the senior citizen's PhilHealth beneﬁts coverage. Only the 80% of the fees or charges that the senior citizen is expected to shoulder shall be charged to his/her PhilHealth beneﬁts.

1.3 All government health facilities shall display in a conspicuous area the hospital room rates, laboratory and diagnostic tests fees, prices of medicines and all other fees and rates in strategic places in the health facility (e.g. admitting section, ER, OPD, billing section,etc.). The above-described price lists shall be regularly updated and submitted annually to the National Center for Health Facility Development-DOH and PhilHealth

1.4 All government health facilities shall post this Administrative Order in conspicuous places where consumers/patients can have access to the information and policies set forth by this document.

1.5 Ofﬁcial receipts shall be issued for every paid-for medical and dental services, laboratory and diagnostic tests, and medicines provided. The receipts shall state the usual rates or fees and the discounted price; and

1.6 No "Income Means Test" nor any other tests shall be applied to the senior citizens as a precondition for the availment of free services as herein described, except when availing for services meant only for indigent patients.

1.7 All government health facilities shall set up a grievance mechanism for senior citizens such as Public Assistance Complaint Units (PACU) to entertain questions/queries with regards to senior citizens beneﬁt under RA 9994. The PACU concerned should inform in writing the actions taken on the complaint of the senior citizen furnishing copy thereof to
the DOH.

Private Health Facilities

2.1 The following enumerates the medically necessary care levels for the diagnosis and/or treatment of an illnes or injury that shall be granted twenty percent (20%) discount, and shall apply to private hospitals:

a) A hospital bed in a private hospital is deemed medically necessary to diagnose and treat an illness or injury and shall be granted a twenty percent (20%) discount; provided the requirements stated below are followed:

-The available room and board accommodation deemed as medically necessary shall be granted 20% discount.

- All existing privileges that are currently part of a hospital bed shall also accrue to the senior citizen.


b) All inpatient and outpatient laboratory and diagnostic examinations shall be granteda twenty percent (20%) discount provided that such diagnosis and/or treatment by the attending physician shall be in accordance with the available Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs) or hospital treatment protocols.

The health facilities shall (apply for all type of health facilities) designate medical ofﬁcers for senior citizens (MOSC) to facilitate the determination of the medical necessity of requested laboratory or diagnostic examinations.

c) All dental services that are deemed to be medically necessary by the attending dentist shall be granted a twenty percent (20%) discount.

2.2 In case the senior citizen is a PhilHealth member or dependent, the 20% discount shall not be charged to the senior citizen's PhilHealth beneﬁts coverage. Only the 80% of the fees or charges that the senior citizen is expected to shoulder may be charged to his/her PhilHealth beneﬁts.

2.3 Professional fees for inpatient and outpatient medical and dental services shall be provided with a 20% discount and a corresponding ofﬁcial receipt shall be issued by the concerned physician or dentist.

2.4 Ofﬁcial receipts shall be issued for every paid medical and dental services provided the twenty (20%) discount shall be granted to the total bill which shall include the professional fees. The billing statement showing the regular rates or fees and the discounted price shall be attached to the ofﬁcial receipt. In case of partial payment, the 20% discount on the total bill shall already apply.

2.5 Private hospitals and health facilities shall display in a conspicuous area the hospital room rates, laboratory and diagnostic tests fees, prices of medicine 3 and all other fees
and rates in strategic places in the health facility (e.g. admitting section, ER, OPD, billing section, etc.). The above-described price lists shall be regularly updated and submitted annually to the National Center for Health Facility Development—DOH and PhilHealth.

2.6 Private hospitals shall set up a grievance mechanism for senior citizens such as Public Assistance Complaint Units (PACU) to entertain questions/queries with regards to senior citizens beneﬁt under RA 9994. The PACU concerned should inform in writing the actions taken on the complaint of the senior citizen furnishing copy thereof to the DOH.

Establishments Dispensing Medicines

3.1 A 20% discount and exemptions from VAT of all drugs and medicines registered with FDA shall be granted to all senior citizens. The 20% discount granted to senior citizen shall be computed in the following manner:

a) The VAT shall be initially deducted from the Retail Price of the medicine to obtain the Net Retail Price; and

b) The 20%0 discount shall be deducted from the Net Retail Price to obtain the Senior Citizen's Price. 

By way of illustration, if the Retail Price (inclusive of VAT) of a certain drug is P100.00, the Senior Citizen's Price shall be computed as follows:

Retail Price (inc. of VAT) Less: P100.00 10.71
VAT (FIDO/1.12) P 89.29 17.86
Net Retail Price Less: 20% P 71.43
Discount Senior Citizens' Price

3.2 The 20% discount is non—transferable. It shall be applied exclusively to drugs and medicines for the use of Senior Citizens. Drugs in formulation, such as pediatric formulations medically prescribed for use of Senior Citizens shall also be granted a 20% discount.

3.3 As a general rule, any single dispensing shall be in accordance with the prescription' issued by a physician and shall not cover more than one (1) month supply to ensure safety and potency of the drugs.

For partial ﬁlling, the establishment's pharmacist shall indicate the quantity partially ﬁlled in the purchase slip booklet and the unﬁlled balance on the prescription. The Senior Citizen shall retain the partially ﬁlled prescription and present the same later to complete the prescribed quantity.

3.4 During operating hours, licensed establishments dispensing medicines shall not be allowed to schedule or limit a period of time for the availment of the Senior Citizens’ discount.

3.5 Ofﬁcial receipts shall be issued to the Senior Citizens for every transaction on medicines which shall contain the Retail Price and the Senior Citizens' Discount Price.

3.6 There shall be a priority lane for elderly and a generic menu card shall be displayed at the facility of all drugstores.

3.7 Drugstores shall ﬁll-up the Purchase Booklet. The Purchase Slip Booklets shall be used to record the kind of OTC medicine purchased, how many, when and where it was purchased. Likewise, this shall help the drugstores to monitor the last purchase made for a certain medicine.

3.8 All drug retail stores shall post this Order in conspicuous places where the Senior Citizens can access information on the 20% discount on medicines.

3.9 Likewise, the 20% discount shall be applied by all drug stores, hospital pharmacies medical and optical clinics, dialysis centers/clinics, supermarkets, convenience stores and similar establishments dispensing medicines authorized by law and duly licensed by the FDA and the local government units.

Health Care Professionals

Health Care Professionals shall have the following responsibilities:

4.1Inscribe his name, address, contact number and PRC number in the request for diagnostics and laboratory tests, and medicine prescription;

4.2 To curb abuse of availing discounts for use of non—senior citizens, the health professionalshall make sure that prescriptions made are for the exclusive use of the senior citizen;

4.3 Inform the senior citizen of his regular fees for the services required;

4.4 Provide an ofﬁcial receipt for the rendered professional services to the senior citizen that states the regular fees and the discounted fees.

5. Free Inﬂuenza and Pneumococcal Vaccination

5.1 The DOH shall administer free vaccinations against the inﬂuenza virus and pneumococcal disease for indigent senior citizen patients. Neglected, abandoned, unattached or homeless senior citizens in government—run residential homes, centers and facilities shall likewise be entitled to free vaccinations.

5.2 The DOH shall anchor its indigent list of senior citizens on the DSWD target of social pensioners based on their National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTPRS) still under the RA 9994.

5.3 The social pension ID issued by the DSWD shall also be used by the DOH for immunization purposes. Likewise, an immunization card/record shall be provided by the DOH for all eligible senior citizens.

5.4 For residential homes and other facilities catering to indigent senior citizens, vaccines shall be made available through the DOH-CHDS to comply with cold-chain requirements under the Expanded Program on Immunization.

5.5 The DOH shall provide the necessary training and orientation of vaccination teams for this purpose.

5.6 The national government shall provide free seasonal ﬂu and pneumococcal vaccines to the indigent Senior Citizens through an additional appropriation under the GAA on top of the DOH regular budget or through a preventive beneﬁt package of the PhilHealth.

6. Documentary Requirements

6.1 All hospitals and drug retail outlets shall require Senior Citizens or their representative to present the following requirements for the availment of the 20% discount:

a) Identiﬁcation card (ID) issued by the city or municipal mayor or Ofﬁce for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) or the barangay captain of the place where the Senior Citizen resides. The said ID shall be recognized nationwide.

b) Except for over—the-counter (OTC) drugs, a doctor's prescription shall be presented. A prescription shall have the following information: name, age, sex, and address of the Senior Citizen, as well as the date, generic name of themedicine, dosage form, dosage strength, quantity, name and signature, address of the prescribing physician, professional license number and narcotic license or S2 number, if applicable. The drugstores may limit the dispensing of OTC drugs to not more than a week supply.

c) Purchase slip booklets shall be used to record the kind of OTC medicine purchased, how many, when and where it was purchased. Likewise, this shall help the drugstores to monitor the last purchase made for a certain medicine.

6.2 For purposes of veriﬁcation, all hospitals, both government and private facilities shall require senior citizens to present other documents such as the passport of the elderly person concerned to establish the senior citizen is a citizen of the Republic of the Philippines and who is at least sixty (60) years of age

7. PhilHealth shall explore beneﬁt packages speciﬁc to the senior citizens

8. All government projects/programs that sell medicines to Senior Citizens and that already offer substantial discount to consumers or is partially subsidized by the government, shall be exempted from the Senior Citizens discount, (e.g. Botika ng Barangay, P I 00)

9. Double discounts shall not be allowed. The Senior Citizens shall have the option'to choose either promotional campaigns and other forms of discounts on certain medicines, or the Senior Citizens discount provided that only the Senior Citizens' discount shall be exempted from VAT.

10, In cases where Senior Citizens are also Persons with Disability (PWD), the Senior Citizen may opt to use either the Senior Citizens or the PWD discount provided that only the Senior Citizens' discount shall be exempted from VAT.

All complaints on non—compliance to the 20% discount on medicines shall be lodged to the respective LGU OSCA where the purchase was made or where the elderly resides, whichever is convenient for the senior citizen.

VII. OFFENSES AND PENALTIES

Non-compliance with these guidelines shall result in sanctions and penalties stated in Section
7 of RA. 9994, as follows: 


Any person who refuses to honor the senior citizen card issued by the govemment or violates any provision of RA. 9994 and its implementing rules and regulations and this Order shall suffer the following penalties:

1. For the ﬁrst violation, a ﬁne of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (Php 50,000.00) but not exceeding One hundred thousand pesos (Php 100,000.00) and imprisonment of not less than two (2) years but not more than six (6) years; and

2. For any subsequent violation, a ﬁne of not less than One hundred thousand pesos (Php 100,000.00) but not exceeding Two hundred thousand pesos (Php 200,000.00) and imprisonment for not less than two (2) years but not more than six (6) years.

3. Any person who abuses the privileges granted herein shall be punished with a ﬁne of not less than ﬁfty thousand pesos (Php 50,000.00) but not more than One hundred thousand pesos (Php 100,000.00) and imprisonment of not less than six (6) months.

4. If the offender is an alien or a fereigner, he/she shall be deported immediately after service of sentence without further deportation proceedings.

5. If the offender is a corporation, partnership, organization or any similar entity the ofﬁcials thereof directly involved such as the president, general manager, managing partner, or such other ofﬁcer charged with the management ”of the business affairs shall be liable therefor. 

6. Upon ﬁling of an appropriate complaint, and after due notice and hearing, the proper authorities may also cause the cancellation or revocation of the business permit, permit tooperate, franchise and other similar privileges granted to any person, establishment or business entity that fails to abide by the provisions provision of R.A. 9994, its implementing rules and regulations, and this Order.

VIII. JURISDICTION

Jurisdiction over the offenses deﬁned under this Order shall belong to the appropriate courts, according to laws existing at the time of the commission of theoffenses.
 
XI. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE

Should any part, term or provision of this Order be. declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable, the validity of all other remaining provisions shall remain. valid and effective.

X. REPEALING CLAUSE

This Order shall repeal Administrative Order 177 series of 2004 and all other. administrative issuances, circulars and memoranda inconsistent with this Order.

XI.

This Order will take effect immediately effect thirty (30) calendar days after its publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette or in a newspaper of general nationWide circulation and upon ﬁling with the University of the Philippines Law Center three
(3) certiﬁed copied of this Order.
</body>
 
<sign>ENRIQUE T ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health
</signtitle>
 


