Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>10/15/2012</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2012- 0022</docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: National Policy For The Implementation of International Health Regulation (IHR) and Asia Paciﬁc Strategy for Emerging Diseases (APSED) in the Philippines 
</subject>
<body>


I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 

Communicable diseases, especially Emerging Infectious Diseases (EIDs) pose serious public health threats in ones locality, country and to the world at large. Asia in which the Philippines is a part of it has been the epicenter of some recent emerging infectious diseases. These are SARS, Avian Inﬂuenza and H1N1. 

In response to these evolving diseases, the International Health Regulations (IHR), a global legal instrument for public health security was revised. The revised IHR did not just focus on 3 diseases (cholera, yellow fever and plague) as the IHR (1969) but expanded its scope to all threats which could be of significant public health risk. These included not just infectious disease threats but also biological, radiological and chemical events which could have a signiﬁcant public health impact. The IHR 2005' came into force on June 15, 2007 with the objective of preventing the international spread of diseases while avoiding unnecessary interference to international travel and trade. It requires all WHO member states to meet minimum core capacity requirements to develop and strengthen national and local capacities for Surveillance and response by June 2012. In the Asia Paciﬁc Region a strategy was developed to strengthen core capacities for emerging infectious disease and to comply with IHR requirement. Known as the Asia Paciﬁc Strategy for Emerging Diseases (APSED), the APSED is a road map for countries of the Asia Paciﬁc to strengthen core capacities required for effective preparedness planning, prevention, prompt detection, characterization, containment and control of emerging diseases which threaten national, regional, and global health security. It was endorsed by WHO Member States to facilitate in strengthening core capacity requirements for emerging diseases. 

In the Philippines a 3 year APSED Work Plan for 2007-2010 was developed and implemented with 6 core components. These are Surveillance and Response, Zoonosis, Laboratory, Infection Control, Risk Communication and Points of Entry. 

In October 2010, the strategy was updated as APSED 2010 to guide national and regional preparedness efforts for future threats. Its goal is “to build sustainable national and regional capacities and partnerships to ensure public health security. From six (6), it now has eight (8) focus areas; these are Surveillance, Risk Assessment and Response, Laboratories, Zoonoses, Infection Prevention and Control, Risk Communications, Public Health Emergency Preparedness, Regional Preparedness, Alert and Response and Monitoring and Evaluation. I 

Since IHR 2005 greatly emphasizes the need to develop country capability for all public health threats and APSED 2010 gears towards ensuring public health security not just through responding to emerging diseases but also to other emergencies of public health importance, there is now a need to widen and reinforce partnerships and networks not just within the Department of Health (DOH) and the different levels of the public health system, but also with other relevant agencies and institutions outside the system. 

The APSED 2010 will provide the directions for a DOH-lead inter-agency collaboration to broaden capacity for preparedness against emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases including all other hazards that can become public health emergencies. The role of WHO will be on the strengthening of regional preparedness, alert and response system and capacities and shall support in the development and updating of national workplans for emerging diseases and/or public health emergencies; 

In order to facilitate these concerted efforts and the need for harmonization, prioritization, coordination, collaboration and efﬁciency in addressing the common threats and bolster networks outside the Department, implementing guidelines will be developed to clarify the role and responsibilities of the health sector in the implementation of IHR/APSED. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This Order is aimed to formalize, set policy direction, and identify the roles and functions of the Department of Health, its ofﬁces and partner agencies in the implementation of Philippine Strategic Plan for APSED in compliance with the IHR 2005. 

III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE 

This Order covers DOH Ofﬁces, Bureaus and National Centers, Centers for Health Development, DOH Hospitals, Local Government Units, Private Hospitals, other members of the Health Sector, and other government agencies involved in surveillance, preparedness and response. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS AND ACRONYMS 

1. Asia Paciﬁc region —— Includes 48 countries and areas of two regions of the - World Health Organization-the South-East Asia Region and the Western Paciﬁc Region 

2. Emerging diseases/emerging infectious diseases (EID) — Infections that newly appear in a population, or have existed but are rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range, including new diseases as well as re-emerging and resurging known diseases and known epidemic prone— diseases. The term “emerging diseases” is used interchangeably with emerging infectious diseases. 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) — Monitoring refers to the process of regular oversight of the implementation of activities, seeking to ensure that input deliveries, work schedules, targeted outputs and other required actions are proceeding as planned. Evaluation refers to a process that attempts to determine as systematically and objectively as possible the relevance, effectiveness and impact of activities in light of their objectives. 

4. National IHR Focal Point — The national center, designated by each Member State or State Party, which shall be accessible at all times for communication with WHO IHR Contact Points under IHR (2005) 

5. Philippine Strategic Plan for APSED (PSPA) — is the national adaptation of i the APSED that contextualizes the suggested WHO strategies and activities in the Philippine setting. 

6. Public Health Emergency (PHE) — An occurrence or imminent threat of an illness or health condition, caused by bioterrorism, epidemic or pandemic disease, or novel and highly fatal infectious agents or biological toxin agents, that posses a substantial risk of a signiﬁcant number of human fatalities or incidents or permanent or long—term disability. A public health emergency mainly refers to an emergency caused by emerging disease and/or other acute  public health events such as food safety events. If not managed quickly, it may go beyond national borders and cause a public health emergency of 5 international concern like an inﬂuenza pandemic. 

7.Public Health risk — is deﬁned as a likelihood of an event that may affect _ adversely the health or human populations, with an emphasis on one 

8. Risk assessment — is a systematic process for gathering, assessing and documenting information to assign a level of risk for a potential public health event. This enables objective evidence-based decisions while giving consideration to the uncertainties and limitations of the information available at a particular point in time. It involves understanding the identity and character of a hazard and evaluating the risk of an adverse outcome in a population following exposure to that hazard. The process can also assess the risk associated with potential intervention measures. During an event, risk assessment is an ongoing process, not a one-time activity. 

V. GUIDING PRINCIPLES 

1. Primary focus of the strategy shall be on country activities, supported by partnerships at national, regional and local level 

2. Actions taken shall be sustainable and built on existing structures 

3. The actions shall be based on a combination of knowledge and experience of effective public health policies and practices 

4. Agencies responsible for the formulation and implementation of initiatives on emerging diseases shall seek to identify synergies and strengthen links with other relevant programs, such as those concerned with food safety or responsible for humanitarian emergencies. 

5. Shall utilize a joint approach to preparedness and response to all public health emergencies 

6. Actions taken shall include advocacy and activities aimed at systematically strengthening institutional and human capacity in order to ensure sustainability of emerging disease programs. 

7. The activities, policies and practices implemented through strategy shall be based on evidence and consider gender, research and ethics aspects wherever possible and feasible 

8. The institutionalization of APSED shall be achieved by building on the existing capacities and strengthening the capabilities of ofﬁces of the DOH 

VI. DECLARATION OF POLICIES 

In line with this, the Department of Health (DOH) provides the following policies and guidelines formalizing the development and implementation of the Philippine APSED 2011—2015 Workplan, including the following: 

1 International Health Regulations of 2005, Part 5-1 Surveillance 

Urges Member States to develop, strengthen and maintain, as soon as possible but no later than ﬁve years from the entry into force of these Regulations, the capacity to detect, assess, notify and report events in accordance with these regulations. 

2. International Health Regulations of 2005, Part 5, Points of Entry. Art. 19 General obligations 

Urges Member States to ensure that the capacities for designated points of entry are developed within the timeframe. 


3. International Health Regulations of 2005, Part 5, Points of Entry. Art. 20 General obligations 


Urges Member states to designate the airports and ports that shall develop the necessary capacities. 


4. International Health Regulations ”I of 2005, Part 5, Points of Entry. Art. 22 Role of competent - authorities 

Urges Member States to assign responsible authorities which shall be responsible for monitoring baggage, cargo, containers, conveyances, goods, postal parcels and human remains departing and arriving from affected areas, so that they are maintained in such condition that they are free of sources of infection or contamination, including vectors and reserviors.



5. Resolution WHA48.13 (1995) 

Urges Member States to strengthen national and local programs of active surveillance of EIDs toward early detection and prompt identiﬁcation of re-emerging new, emerging and infectious diseases. 

6.  Republic Act 9271 Quarantine Act of 2004; 

The Implementing Rules and Regulations of Quarantine Act of 2004 include the implementation of the IHR of the World Health Organization in which the country is bound to observe and implement as a member state of said organization. 

The Bureau of Quarantine, being the health authority, is mandated to ensure security against the introduction and spread of infectious diseases to include the emerging diseases and public health emergencies of international concern. 


7. Republic Act 357

Reporting of communicable diseases requires all individuals and health facilities to report notiﬁable diseases to local and national health authorities. 


8. Presidential Decree 1566 of 1978 

Strengthening of Philippine disaster control capability and establishment of the National Program on Community Disaster Preparedness. 

9. Executive Order 826, - August 14, 2009 

Deﬁning the Powers, Functions and Responsibilities of Government Agencies in Response to Ebola Reston Virus Infection and Matters related thereto. 

10. Administrative Order No. 10 ' (from the Ofﬁce of the President) 

Creating the Philippine Inter-Agency Committee on Zoonoses, Deﬁning Its Powers, Functions, Responsibilities, Other Related Matters and Providing Funds Thereof 

11. Administrative Order No 2007- 0036 

Guidelines on the Philippine Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (PIDSR) Framework 

12. Department Personnel Order No 2005—1585

Creation of a Management Committee on Prevention and Control of Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases. 

13 Administrative Order No. 2008- 0009

Adopting the 2008 Revised List of Notiﬁable Diseases, Syndromes, Health- Related Events and Conditions. 

14. Administrative Order No 6-B of 1999 

Institutionalization of a Health Emergency Preparedness and Response Program within the DOH 

15. Administrative Order No 168 s2004
National Policy on Health Emergencies and Disasters
 
16. Administrative Order No 2010- Policies and Guidelines on the 0029 Establishment of Operation Center for Emergencies and Disasters 

VII. THE NATIONAL FRAMEWORK 

A. Vision 
A Philippines protected from the impact of emerging diseases and other public health threats and emergencies 

B. Mission 
A sustainable functional health system capable of protecting communities against emerging diseases and other public health emergencies 

C. Goals 
To ensure a sustainable national capacity and strengthen partnership with allied agencies to ensure public health security through preparedness planning, prevention, early detection and prompt response to EIDs and other PHEs. 

D. Implementing Mechanism 

The Philippine Strategic Plan for APSED shall be implemented through the following:

- The NEC shall be the lead ofﬁce and Secretariat 
- The Flaming Committee shall be composed of the Technical Working Group, whose members represent each of the eight (8) component areas 
- The M&E Committee shall be chaired by the NEC in consultation with other  ofﬁces and agencies  

E. Roles and Responsibilities 

Each focus area shall be composed of a DOH ofﬁce as lead and other ofﬁces and/or partners for members: 


The following DOH ofﬁces have been identiﬁed to be part of the PSPA implementing unit. Their expected roles and responsibilities in the context of the nationally-adapted APSED are: 

1. The National Epidemiology Center (NEC) — as the national IHR and APSED Focal Point: 

a. Shall provide updates to partners including WHO 

b. Shall develop and disseminate policies, guidelines and issuances on epidemiology and surveillance in accordance with the APSED 2010 goals and objectives 

c. Shall lead in the advocacy activities to gain support for APSED at all levels 

d. Shall coordinate the different concern ofﬁces in the preparation of speciﬁc plans for IHR and APSED.

— as the lead agency and in charge of overall Epidemiologic Surveillance and Response: 

a. Shall ensure the nation-wide implementation of PIDSR, from data collection to data analysis 

b. Shall review and analyze collected data that may indicate possible/potential outbreak and/or PHE 

c. Shall ensure regular reporting and sharing of information relevant to partner agency/ofﬁce 

d. Shall provide technical assistance and/or capability building training to partners/other agencies to enhance capacities for surveillance, risk assessment and response including M&E 

e. Shall develop a functional M&E system using the IHR indicators 

2. The National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (N CDPC), as the lead agency in the prevention and control of emerging infectious diseases and in collaboration with the Philippine Inter Agency Committee for Zoonoses . (PhICZ), the Department of Agriculture, its Protected Areas and Wildlife Bureau and the Bureau of Animal Industry and the National Meat Inspection Services (NMIS) — as lead agency in managing and providing technical assistance of zoonotic diseases: 

a. Shall ensure that human health and animal health plans, programs and activities are consistent with the national health plans and APSED 

b. Shall develop and disseminate policies, guidelines and issuances on zoonotic diseases 

c. Shall monitor and evaluate proper implementation of the program plans and policies 

d. Shall provide capability building programs/technical assistance to enhance partner agencies’/ofﬁces’ capacities on zoonotic diseases 

3. The Health Emergency Management Service (HEMS), as the DOH functional arm for response for emergencies and disasters will also be the Ofﬁce Incident I and Command Center. The HEMS shall be in charge of overall coordination and mobilization of supplies, equipment and manpower in times PHEs within and outside of the DOH 

a. Shall ensure a functional coordinating mechanism between agencies designated as leads under the components of PHE Focus Area especially during PHEs 

b. Shall maintain the coordination with non-DOH agencies on public health concerns during emergencies 

c. Shall provide necessary technical assistance to agency/ies to enhance capacities for preparedness and response during disasters and emergencies 

4. The Bureau of Quarantine (BOQ), as Assistant IHR Focal Point for the implementation of PSPA and as lead agency in ensuring that EIDs are detected, identiﬁed and contained in all ports of entry of the country: 

a. Shall minimize international spread of diseases (not just for preventing entry of diseases) 

b. Shall contribute to early detection and reporting of suspected cases among international travelers 

c. Shall serve as unique response points to implement public health measures, including health alerts and information to travelers 

d. Shall develop and disseminate policies and guidelines on quarantine standards speciﬁc to PHE preparedness 

5. The National Center for Health Facilities Development (NCHF D) together with Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM), as lead agency in providing all laboratory support that may be required and requested by the NEC, regional laboratories and/or other allied agencies to determine/conﬁrm suspected case/cases: 

a. Shall ensure the provision and delivery of quality laboratory services to provide accurate data for preparedness planning and response provision during outbreaks and PHES 

b. Shall ensure the availability of qualiﬁed laboratory medical specialists, technical experts and consultants to provide direction on laboratory management and operations 

c. Shall strengthen capacities of laboratories at the (country) regional and local levels to improve/enhance capacities for surveillance 

d. Shall assist lower level laboratories to provide timely, accurate and analytical results for different diagnostic and analytical functions for the aSsessment and surveillance of EIDs and other possible hazards resulting from other PHEs 

6. The National Center for Health Development Facilities (N CHFD) — as lead , agency in ensuring that all policies on Infection Prevention and Control are strictly implemented and enforced in all facilities: 

a. For Infection Control 

-Shall develop and disseminate policies, guidelines and procedure on Infection Prevention and Control at various levels of health care facilities to institutionalize Infection Prevention and Control and sustain high level commitment in its implementation 

-Shall capacitate health staff and other allied agencies’ personnel through the provision of capability building and knowledge enhancement programs on Infection Prevention and Control 

-Shall advocate with various stakeholders at all levels the need for strict implementation and compliance to IPC program 

-Shall strengthen linkage/partnership with other agencies to broaden Infection Prevention and Control implementation 

-Shall initiate M&E activities to generate baseline data necessary for policy development/enhancement, development of standards and guidelines and overall improvement of protocols and procedures on Infection Prevention and Control 

b. For Health Facility Preparedness 

-Shall develop and disseminate policies and guidelines on preparedness to all health facilities at the public and private sectors 

-Shall ensure that facilities in all levels have their appropriated preparedness plans including availability of supplies, manpower and other logistical support (vehicles, communication equipment, etc) 

-Shall ensure that facilities are compliant with national regulations on structural safety and resiliency against disasters, surge capacity for emergencies 

-Shall coordinate with relevant agency/ofﬁce the need to enhance personnel capacities for preparedness, including surveillance, risk assessment, Infection Prevention and Control 

7. The National Center for Health Promotion (N CHP) —— as lead agency in ensuring management of all communications pertaining to epidemics and other public health events and emergencies are correct, up to date and timely and are disseminated to the concerned agencies using the most appropriate channels: 

a. Shall design and access communication and health promotion schemes to address various stakeholders to manage information especially during times of PHEs 

b. Shall design and disseminate information to generate support and encourage positive behavior change as measures for preparedness 

c. Shall manage and disseminate information within the context of PHE to the public, especially to media to maintain public trust and avoid unnecessary concerns 

d. Shall provide technical assistance and capability building skills programs on communication management during outbreaks and PHEs, including development if local communication materials to broaden support and understanding of PHE preparedness among the public 

e. Shall coordinate information management with relevant government agencies (Philippine Information Agency, National Disaster Risk Reduction Management Council) and media companies 

8. The Material and Management Division — as ofﬁce that shall implement policies speciﬁc only to emergency events to facilitate release of funds for the purchase mobilization/deployment of supplies, equipment and manpower in times of epidemics and public health emergencies: 

a. In coordination with HEMS, shall ensure prompt provision of required logistics for response identiﬁed through surveillance data analysis and recommended by the NBC and HEMS 

b. Shall coordinate timely release of possible supplies and stockpile for deployment especially in PHE-affected areas 

9. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as lead agency for the detection, identiﬁcation and containment of all possible pathogens/contaminants in food, drugs and other consumer items: 

a. Shall develop and disseminate policies and guidelines on regulatory measures for standards on food, drugs, cosmetics, medical technology and devices and procedures 

b. Shall advocate with stakeholders at all levels the need for compliance to regulatory measures on various food, medicine and consumer products as measures for PHE preparedness 

10. Local Government Units: 

a. Shall implement all policies, and adhere to all standards, and requirements for control and prevention of EIDs and other public health threats 

b. Shall implement all policies and adhere to all standards, requirements and systems needed to prepare for and respond to emerging diseases and public health emergencies set by the health sector. 

0. Shall coordinate with the Department of Health in responding to public health threats 

d. Shall participate in interagency related activities led and organized by DOH 

11. Other Members of the Health Sector: 

a. Shall implement all policies, and adhere to all standards, and requirements for control and prevention of EIDs and other public health threats

b. Shall implement all policies and adhere to all standards, requirements and systems needed to prepare for and respond to emerging diseases and public health emergencies set by the health sector 

c. Shall coordinate with the Department of Health in responding to public health threats 

d. Shall participate in interagency related activities led and organized by DOH 

e. Shall advocate for the prevention and control of emerging diseases and other public health threats 

VIII. REPEALING CLAUSE 

All orders, rules and regulations or any provision thereof inconsistent with this Order are hereby deemed repealed and modiﬁed accordingly. 

IX. EFFECTIVITY 

This order shall take effect within ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or newspaper of national circulation and then submission of copy to UP Law Center and shall supersede all issuance inconsistent herewith. 

</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

