Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>07/17/2012</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2012 - 0011</docnum>
<subject> 
Subject: Further Amendment to Administrative Order No. 142, s. 2004 regarding the “Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD)’s issuance of Certiﬁcate of Product Registration for Foreign Assisted Projects Procurement and Laboratory Testing of Pharmaceutical and Biological Products Procured by and/or delivered to the Department of Health (DOI-I)”
</subject>

<body>
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE

Administrative Order (AO) No. 142, series of 2004 entitled, “Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD)’s issuance of Certiﬁcate of Product Registration for Foreign Assisted Projects Procurement and Laboratory Testing of Pharmaceutical and Biological Products Procured by and/or delivered to the Department of Health (DOH)” intends to, among others, facilitate the issuance of Certiﬁcates of Product Registration (CPR) for the procurement of pharmaceutical and biological products and invasive medical devices of foreign assisted projects (F APs).

AO No. 2005-0007 established an exemption from the requirement of the CPR for all pharmaceutical and biological products and invasive medical devices procured through the-United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), World Health Organization (WHO), and Global Drug Facility (GDF), citing the urgency and indispensability of these goods for the various preventive and curative health programs and services of the government, the strict quality assurance procedures observed in their manufacture, and the efﬁciency of the procurement systems of international organizations/ institutions.

Republic Act (RA) No. 9711 approved on August 18, 2009 provided for, among others, the renaming of the Bureau of Food and Drug (BFAD) to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

In addition to the abovementioned international organizations/institutions, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) has been engaged in the large-scale procurement of modern family planning (MFP) commodities. Its procurement procedures and policies are based on 1) best value for money, 2) fairness, integrity, and transparency, 3) open and effective competition, and 4) the interest of UNFPA — which is to reduce poverty and to ensure that every pregnancy is wanted, every birth
is safe, every young person is free of HIV/AIDS, and every girl and woman is treated with dignity and respect. UNFPA also has a quality assurance policy supported by WHO that follows international quality standards.


In 2011, the DOH began receiving MFP commodities as donations from the UNFPA. The DOH intends to henceforth include the UNFPA as one of its options in the procurement of MFP commodities and other related goods.

II. OBJECTIVE

This Order provides for an additional exemption from the requirement of a Certiﬁcate of Product Registration (CPR) for all pharmaceutical and biological products and invasive medical devices procured through the UNFPA.

In providing for this additional exemption, this Department, through the FDA, does not in any way abandon, but hereby reiterates and consistently adopts, its mandate and responsibility to ensure the safety, efﬁcacy, and good quality of products applied for registration.

III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE

This Order shall apply to the Food and Drug Administration, its ofﬁces and units, and all others concerned.

IV. GUIDELINES

A. Section 111, part A of AO No. 142, s. 2004, as amended by AO No. 2005-0007, is hereby amended further to read as follows:

III. Guidelines

A. Issuance of CPR for pharmaceutical products being procured under competitive international bidding and funded by foreign assisted projects

I. As a general rule, all foreign bidders belonging to member countries of international funding agencies of DOH projects may be allowed to participate in a DOH bidding even without a CPR; however, no award or contract shall be made unless and until the appropriate CPR is issued by the FDA.

a) The foreign bidder without a CPR shall submit the documentary requirements for the application for a CPR at the time it makes its bid. After bid opening, when the bidder would appear to be the lowest but not yet complying, the bidder will have to make the application for a CPR to FDA within (10) days, including the submission of a sample in commercial presentation.

b) Within ten (10) days from. submission of the abovementioned application for a CPR, the FDA should process the same subject to the pertinent provisions of various ' FDA Circulars and requirements for the registration of pharmaceutical products.


2. However, when the procurement is made through the UNICEF, UNDP, WHO, GDF, or UNFPA, no CPR shall be required.”

B. Section III, part B of AO No. 142, s. 2004, is hereby amended to read as follows:

III. Guidelines

B. Laboratory Testing of Procured and/or delivered Pharmaceutical and Biological products

1. For DOH-procured and/or delivered pharmaceutical products, the FDA shall conduct appropriate tests not exceeding the following days from actual receipt of the drugs and medicines and medical devices in sufﬁcient quantity and samples, based on BFAD Circular 4—A dated June 2001 and BFAD Circular 12 dated October 5, 2002:

a) For anti—tuberculosis drugs — 15 calendar days

b) For injectables & medical devices that require sterility test
— 30 calendar days

c) For all other drugs and medical devices that do not require
sterility test — 20 calendar days

2. For UNICEF, UNDP, WHO, GDF, or UNFPA procured and/or delivered pharmaceutical products and devices, a certiﬁcation of analysis that the pharmaceutical product has passed the required laboratory analysis by the national pharmaceutical drug laboratory of the country of origin and a copy of the test procedure undertaken and reference standards used shall be required. The certiﬁcation must be authenticated by the Philippine consular ofﬁce located at the country of origin.

3. For DOH—procured and/or delivered vaccines and other immunobiological products not supplied by UNICEF, UNDP, WHO, GDF, or UNFPA, the FDA shall conduct Lot Release Certiﬁcation process, including visual examination of the lot samples and labels as required by A0 No. 27 series of 2001. Lot Release certiﬁcate shall be issued within 7 working days from receipt of Samples.

4. All UNICEF, UNDP, WHO, GDF, or UNFPA procured and/or delivered vaccines and other immunobiological products are exempted from Lot Release certiﬁcation and testing.

5. After having conducted the preceding examinations, should FDA determine that further laboratory tests be required, said tests shall be done through a WHO—recognized laboratory.

V. REPEALING AND SEPARABILITY CLAUSE

All orders, rules, regulations, and other related issuances inconsistent with or contrary to this Order are hereby repealed, amended, or modiﬁed accordingly. All provisions of existing issuances which are not affected by this Order shall remain valid and in effect.

In the event that any provision or part of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any Court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective.

VI. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect immediately after copies hereof have been ﬁled with the National Administrative Register (NAR) of the UP Law Center.
</body>


<sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


