Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>10/10/2013</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2013 - 0029 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Amendment to A.0. No. 16s. 1998 dated April 24, 1998, regarding the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 7799 “An Act Establishing a District Hospital in the Municipality of Talisay, Province of Cebu, to be Known as the Talisay District Hospital, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” </subject>
<body>
Republic of the Philippines Department of Health QFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 

 
I. Rationale / Background 

The Talisay District Hospital (TDH), a Department of Health (DOH) hospital was established 1n I998 under Republic Act No. 7799 of 1994 th rough the efforts of Deputy Speaker Congressman Eduardo R. Gullas, Representative of the 1st District of the Province of Cebu. 

In 1998, Administrative Order No. 16. dated April 24, 1998 was issued which provided. the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA No. 7799 of 1.994. The construction of the hospital was funded by the National Government. Upon completion, the hospital was inaugurated on August 3, 1999 by then President Joseph Estrada and became operational on August 5, 1999. The hospital was licensed by DOH as a Level 1 health facility with an authorized. capacity of 10 Beds. 

Initially, the TDH was envisioned to provide health services to the 22 densely populated barangays of Talisay City in addition to the population or the neighboring municipalities of Minglaniila and Naga (which are part of the ISI District of the Province of Cebu and the accessible barangays of the City of Toledo. 

Due to the accessibility of TDH. the hospital is considered as the center of total wellness of the marginalized population of the community. The numbers of in-patients have increased resulting to an average bed occupancy rate of 194.2% based on authorized Bed capacity of 10 beds in the last five years (2007 201 1). Hence TDH IS now implementing 25 beds despite the funding allocation which IS appropriate only for a 10 Bed capacity hospital. 

In consideration of the hospital’s strategic location in Talisay City, being the favored destination of various sports enthusiasts and the only public hospital in the area, it serves as the immediate health facility for trauma, vehicular accidents and the like. However, due to inadequate resources, i,e. health human resource complements, upgraded medical equipment and facilities, about i trauma cases in Year 20] i were referred to Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center (VSMMC) in Cebu City From January 1— June 30, 2012, TDH referred 2, 083 trauma cases to VSMMC 


By upgrading the TDH from 10 beds to a 50— bed authorized Level 11 general hospital (based on the new classification of hospitals sport AO No 2012 0012) with emphasis on trauma, rehabilitation and sports medicine, complemented with adequate infrastructure, upgraded equipment and. trained health human resources, the hospital will be more proactive and responsive to the thrust of the DOH, “ Kasulugan Pangkalahatan (KP)” and thereby better address the health needs of the most marginalized sector of the community. 

In the DOH Philippine Hospital Development Plan, the TDH is envisioned. to become a Trauma, Rehabilitation, and Sports Medicine Center in the Visayas. 

II. Objectives 

This Administrative Order sets the Amendment of A. O. No 16 5.1998 dated April 24, 1998, in order to implement a 50— bed capacity Level 2 DOH hospital. 

III. Scope of Application 

These Implementing Rules and Regulations supersede A.O. No. 16 5.1998 and are adopted to prescribe new guidelines and procedures for the implementation of RA. 7799 in order to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the objectives thereof. 

IV. Definition of Terms/ Acronyms 

1. Act — refers to Republic Act No. 7799, “An Act Establishing a District Hospital in the Municipality of Talisay, Province of Cebu, to be Known as the Talisay District Hospital, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” 

2. CO — refers to the Capital Outlay 

3. General Hospital — a hospital that provides services for all kinds of illnesses, diseases, injuries or deformities. A general hospital shall provide medical and surgical care to the sick and injured, maternity, newborn and child care. It shall be equipped with the service capabilities needed to support board certified/eligible medical specialists and other licensed physicians rendering services in, but not limited to, the following: 

a. Clinical Services 

1. Family Medicine;  

2. Pediatrics; 

3. Internal Medicine; 

4. Obstetrics and Gynecology; 

5. Surgery; 

b. Emergency Services; 

c. Outpatient Services; 

d. Ancillary and Support Services such as, clinical laboratory, imaging facility and pharmacy.  


4. Level 2 - refers to the DOH license of a general hospital under the new classification provided for under DOH Administrative Order No. 2012,0012 dated July 18, 2012 that shall have as minimum, all of Level 1 capacity. including, but not limited to, the following: 

a. An organized staff of qualified and competent personnel with Chief of Hospital/ Medical Director and appropriate board certified Clinical Department Heads; 

b. Departmentalized and equipped with the service capabilities needed support board certified/ eligible medical specialists and other licensed physicians rendering services in the specialties of Medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Surgery, their sub specialties and ancillary services; 

c. Provision for general Intensive Care Unit for critically ill patients; 

d. Provision for Neonatal Intensive Care Unit; 

e. Provision for High Risk: Pregnancy Unit; 

f. Provision for respiratory therapy services; 

g. A DOH licensed tertiary clinical laboratory; 

h. A DOH licensed. level 2 imaging facility with mobile x-ray inside the institution and With capability for contrast examinations. 


5. MOOE -refers to the Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses. 

6. PS — refers to the Personal Services 

7. TDH — refers to Talisay District Hospital in San Isidro, Talisay City, Cebu. 

V. Policies and Guidelines A. General Policies 

The TDH, as a SO-Bed capacity DOH Hospital shall provide general health care with specialization in trauma, rehabilitation and sports medicine, fully equipped with all the updated facilities, equipment and health human resource complement for a general health care facility with a structure consistent with the DOH standards of a Level 2 General Hospital under the new classification of hospitals per AO No. 2012-0012. The TDH shall be provided with funds (PS, MOOE, CO) appropriate and adequate for a Level 2 hospital. 

B. Speciﬁc / Implementing Guidelines 

In support of the upgrading of the hospital, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Redirection of Roles 

By the end of FY 2013, a fully operational Level 2 general hospital with a capacity of 25 beds shall be implemented. The TDH shall be upgraded to 50' beds upon recommendation of the CHD—Central Visayas and the Cluster Head of the Visayas Operations Cluster and approved by the Secretary of Health. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The TDH shall continue to honor the positions, seniority, security and other rights of tenure of its human resources. It shall also make an evaluation of the existing health human resources, upgrade their positions and hire the necessary skilled health human resource complement to conform to DOH standards. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All assets, movable and immovable, and records of the TDH as well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly documented and be accounted for, following existing policies and guidelines. 


4. Equipment 

The TDH shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH standards of a Level 2 general hospital with specialized services for trauma, rehabilitation and sports medicine. 

5. Infrastructure _ The TDH shall implement construction/repair/renovations of existing infrastructures to conform to DOH, Fire Code, and the National Building Code of the Philippines among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The TDH shall develop and implement standards of hospital operations to ensure quality patient care and safety of both patients and client of the hospital. It shall implement the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP), Patient Safety, Continuing Quality Improvement and other public health programs in the hospital for efficient and patient- centered general health care facility. I 

7. Quality Management 

The TDH shall enhance and improve Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) programs, patient safety, policies and standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are not contrary to existing local and national standards. Furthermore, it will develop and further strengthen its hospital resource management capability. 

VI. Implementing Structure A. Administrative Control 

The Department of Health-Area Operations Cluster for Visayas in coordination with the Center for Health Development — Central Visayas and the Hospital Governing Board shall have oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations and management of TDH as provided under the Guidelines in Establishing Governing Boards for Augmenting Management Capacity of Public Hospitals (A.O. 2006-0007) or conferred upon it by applicable laws and regulations. The CHD shall monitor the implementation of RA 7799 guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Chief of Hospital of T DH shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality-standard. hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental and ﬁnancial reports to the DOH-Central Office through the Center for Health Development- Central Visayas. 

B. Source of Financing 

The amount necessary to carry out implementation of Republic Act No. 7799 shall be sourced out accordingly. 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA) 2013 and onwards. 

2. The Maintenance, Operating and Other Expenses (.MOOE) and other additional funding resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital revenue, PhilHealth reimbursements and other sources.

3. Personal Services to carry out the full implementation of the approved hospital staffing pattern of a 25—bed capacity hospital shall be sourced from the GAA 2013 onwards. 

VII. Repealing / Separability Clause: 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent-or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modified accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>


 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

