Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>06/10/2013</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2013 - 0019 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8372, “An Act Converting the Don Jose S. Monfort Memorial Hospital, in the Municipality of Barotac Npevo. Province of Iloilo, into a Tertiaﬂ Hospital, Functioning as an Extension of the Western Visaxas Medical Center in Iloilo City to be known as the Don Jose S. Monfort Medical Center Extension HoSpital and Appropriating Funds Therefor” 
</subject>
<body>
 
I. Rationale/Background 

The Barotac Nuevo Municipal Hospital in Barotac Nuevo, Iloilo was created pursuant to Section 40 of PD. 1177, as amended, and a Letter of Implementation No. 29 dated December 5, 1975. The hospital building was constructed by the Ministry of Public Works in 1982 until 1984 and was completed on March 31, 1985. The 10-bed capacity Hospital finally became operational in November 1984 with twenty-two (22) personnel complement. 

On February 1, 1986, the Barotac Nuevo Municipal Hospital was renamed Don Jose S. Monfort Memorial Hospital by virtue of BR 891, authored by then Assemblyman Narciso D. Monfort. 

On March 20, 1992, RA 7264 was passed increasing the hospital bed capacity from 10-bed to 50-bed capacity. However, the supposed operation of the 50-bed capacity hospital was not implemented due to the fiscal constraint wherein the Provincial Government of Iloilo had approved only a budget for a 10-bed capacity hospital in 1993-94. 

By virtue of RA 8372 of 1997, “An Act Converting the Don Jose S. Monfort .Memorial Hospital, in the Municzpality of Barotac Nuevo, Province of Iloilo, into a Tertiary Hospital, Functioning as an Extension of the Western Visayas Medical Center in Iloilo City to be known as the Don Jose S. Monfort Medical Center Extension Hospital, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”, the re-nationalization of DJ SMMCEH took effect on January 1, 2000. 

Under the old classification of hospitals, the DOH issued a license to DJSMMCEH as 25 bed—Level 2 general hospital with 59 implementing beds. With the 25 authorized bed capacity, the 2011 annual bed occupancy rate is 117.41%. 

The DJSMMCEH is strategically located in the northern part of Iloilo province. It can be reached by land travel of about an hour from the WVMC in Iloilo City. 

The increasing number of clients was reflected in the DJSMMCEH annual hospital statistical reports. OPD consultations in 2009 totaled to 11,981 and it continue to increase in 2010 (13,957), and 14,438 in 2011. Admissions were notably increased from the 2009 of only 2,004 to 2,593 in 2010 and 3,500 in 2011. 

In 2011, the hospital had referred 131 tertiary cases to WVMC because of the limitation in handling complicated cases. 

The DJSMMCEH, after three decades of operation, has upgraded its laboratory, radiology and other ancillary services, has improved the supplies of drugs and medicines, continuously provide competency-based training among its personnel and prides itself of efficiency in mother and child health care services. 


II. Objective 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations for the Implementation of RA 83 72 otherwise known as an “Act Converting the Don Jose S. Monfort Memorial Hospital, in the Municipality of Barotac Nuevo, Province of Iloilo, into a Tertiary Hospital, fuctioning as an Extension of the Western Visayas Medical Center in Iloilo City to be known as the Don Jose S. Monfort Medical Center Extension Hospital, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

III. Purpose 

These Rules and Regulations are adopted to prescribe guidelines, procedures in the implementation of RA 83 72 to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the objectives thereof. 

IV. Definition of Terms/Acronyms 

1. Act refers to Republic Act No. 83 72 otherwise known as an “An Act Converting the Don Jose S. Monfort Memorial Hospital, in the Municipality of Barotac Nuevo, Province of Iloilo, into a Tertiary Hospital, Functioning as an Extension of the Western Visayas Medical Center in Iloilo City to be known as the Don Jose S. Monfort Medical Center Extension Hospital, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” ' 

2: CHD — refers to the Center for Health Development for Western Visayas 

3. DJ SMMCEH — refers to the Don Jose Susteguer Monfort Medical Center Extension Hospital 

4. Hospital Bed Capacity— pertains to the number of hospital beds to accommodate inpatients 

5. Tertiary Hospital refers to hospital with capabilities and facilities for providing medical care to cases requiring the expertise of trained specialists sub-specialists and other licensed physicians using highly specialized ancillary diagnostic and therapeutic equipment. 

6. WWIC - refers to Western Visayas Medical Center 



V. Policies and Guidelines 

A. General Policies 

The DJSMMCEH shall provide general health care with emphasis on mother and child health care services, fully equipped with updated facilities and equipment in addition to trained health human resource complement. 

B. Implementing Guidelines 

In support of the implementation of Republic Act No. 8372 the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Redirection of Roles 

By the year 2013, a fully operational tertiary health care facility with emphasis on mother and child health care services shall be implemented. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The WVMC, having direct supervision, shall review and evaluate the DJSMMCEH existing health human resource complement. It shall continue to honor the positions, seniority, security and other rights of tenure of medical and non—medical personnel. It shall cause to upgrade positions and increase in the number of health human resources in conformity with the DOH standards. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All movable and immovable assets and records of the DJ SMMCEHas well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly documented and be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

Inventory of the existing hospital equipment shall be undertaken by DJ SMMCEH and with the assistance of the WVMC shall undertake upgrading to conform to the DOH regulations and standards for a general hospital. 

5. Infrastructure 

The DJSMMCEH shall effect the repair/renovations and refurbishing of existing hospital infrastructure and undertake upgrading of the same to conform to DOH standards and the Building Code of the Philippines. 

6. Systems Development 

With WVMC’s technical assistance and supervision, the DJ SMMCEH shall develop appropriate level of service capability and inter-facility referral systems. Likewise, DJSMMCEH shall implement the standards of hospital operations in accordance to DOH manuals of hospital operations, plans and programs for the continuing quality improvement to ensure clients’ safety. Through the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program .(IHOMP), DJSMNICEH shall improve its information management system. 

The DJSMMCEH shall implement quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 certification which the hospital aims to acquire in 2013. ' 

VI. Implementing Structure 

1. Administrative Control 

The Department of Health-Area Operations Cluster Visayas, in coordination with the Center for Health Development-Western Visayas, Iloilo City shall have oversight jurisdiction over hospital operations and management. The CI-ID-WV shall monitor the implementation of RA 83 7 2. 

The WVMC Medical Center Chief having direct supervision over DJSMMCEH shall ensure that the designated in—charge shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management of DJSNIMCEH and that submission of developmental and ﬁnancial reports and other documents to the DOH-Central Office through the Center for Health Development-Western Visayas are strictly carried out. 

2. Source of Financing 

The amount necessary to carry out the implementation of this Act shall be sourced out accordingly. ' 

2.1 Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA) of 2013 onwards and other sources. 

2.2 The additional maintenance and operating expenses resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the hospital income, Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PI-11C) reimbursements and ”other sources. . 

VII. Repealing / Separability Clause 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modified accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 


</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
 

