Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>01/18/2013</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2013 - 0002</docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT : Establishment of the Hospital Accreditation Commission as the National Accrediting Body for Hospitals in the Philippines.
</subject>
<body>
 

I. RATIONALE 

An important strategic thrust of the Kalusugang Pangkalahatan (Universal Health Care) is “Improved access to quality hospitals and health care facilities.” One strategy of the Department of Health (DOH) is the Health Facility Enhancement Program (HFEP) in which funds are provided so that “government- owned and operated hospitals and health facilities are upgraded to expand capacity and provide quality services to help attain the Medium Term Development Goals, attend to traumatic injuries and other types of emergencies, and manage non— communicable disease and their complications.” Further, the Stafﬁng Pattern of hospitals has been revised and a program of Human Resource Development and Capability Building is being implemented to improve the quality of services provided. 

Moreover, to assure the provision of quality health services in all government and private hospitals, accreditation can be utilized by assessing the hospital’s capabilities, processes and outcomes against a set of standards. This is the concept behind the requirement of the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) that a hospital be accredited in order to be eligible for the reimbursement of hospital expenses and professional fees. 

Pursuant to PhilHealth Board Resolution No. 786, s. 2005, PhilHealth shall implement the policy on “yd—Party Accreditation”. This will ensure that the equipment and infrastructure projects acquired through HFEP, the new stafﬁng pattern, and the program of Human Resource Development are properly utilized to support the provision of quality hospital care. 

The Hospital Accreditation Commission shall be established, to be headed by a duly designated representative of the Department of Health and composed of representatives of Government agencies and Professional (Private) Associations representing stakeholders in the hospital sector. It shall utilize resource persons and expertise in quality management and accreditation available in the country. 



II. OBJECTIVES 

The objectives of this Administrative Order are as follows: 

1 General Objective: 

To establish the Hospital Accreditation Commission which shall be the National Accrediting Body for Hospitals utilizing the PhilHealth Benchbook Standards to improve the Quality of Services of Hospitals in the Philippines pursuant to the strategic thrust of the “Kalusugang Pankalahatan” (Universal Health Care) 

2. Speciﬁc Objectives: 

2.1 To formulate the policy directions regarding accreditation of all government and private hOSpitals in the country utilizing the PhilHealth Benchbook Standards 

2.2 To authorize the Hospital Accreditation Commission to assess all government and private hospitals as a strategy to improve access and the quality of services provided. 

2.3 To provide for funding the Hospital Accreditation Commission in the implementation of the Hospital Accreditation Program. 

2.4 To provide for funding for the training and accreditation of all government hospitals in their respective budgets. 

III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE 

This issuance shall apply to all government and private hospitals in the country. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

1. Accreditation of a hOSpital -— the act of recognizing that a hospital conforms to the prescribed PhilHealth Benchbook Standards by conducting a survey and evaluating the survey ﬁndings. 

2. PhilHealth Benchbook — a set of standards developed for PhilHealth by international and local experts considering loCal circumstances, laws and culture, and used as a basis to accredit hospitals for various purposes and awarding of beneﬁts. 

3. “Third party accreditation” — a mechanism in which the survey for the accreditation by PhilHealth of a hospital is done not by the entity reimbursing the hospitalization expenses but by a “third party”



V. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

1. The Hospital' Accreditation Commission is recognized by the DOH as the National Accrediting Body for Hospitals. The hospitals accredited by Hospital Accreditation Commission shall enjoy the beneﬁts that will be provided by DOH. 

The Hospital Accreditation Commission is recognized by PhilHealth as an organization authorized under “3rd Party Accreditation” to survey hospitals applying for PhilHealth Accreditation. The hospitals surveyed by the Hospital Accreditation Commission shall be awarded by PhilHealth the rating and beneﬁts commensurate to the survey ﬁndings. 

VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES 

1. The Hospital Accreditation Commission shall be established'composed of representatives of the following Government agencies and professional organizations: 

1.1 Department of Health 

1.2 Philippine Health Insurance Corporation 

1.3 Philippine Council on Accreditation for Healthcare Organizations 1.4 Philippine Hospital Association 

1.5 Philippine Medical Association 

1.6 Philippine College of Hospital Administrators 

1.7 Private Hospital Association of the Philippines 

1.8 Philippine Nurses Association 

The Hospital Accreditation Commission is authorized to expand its membership in accordance with its mandate and programs. 

2. The Hospital Accreditation Commission shall be responsible for the planning and implementation of the Hospital Accreditation Program.

3. The Hospital Accreditation Commission shall use the PhilHealth Benchbook Standards, Assessment Tools and Scoring and Rating Guidelines in the Hospital Accreditation System. 

4. The DOH and PhilHealth shall formulate incentives and beneﬁts for government and private hospitals which achieve ratings of “Center of Excellence” or “Center of Quality”. 

VII. BUDGET AND FUNDING 

1. The Hospital Accreditation Commission may charge hospitals, both government and private, reasonable fees for the accreditation services. 

2. To enable the Hospital Accreditation Commission to effectively discharge its mandate, a grant shall be given to HOSpital Accreditation Commission to subsidize the operational, administrative and support services. 

3. The DOH and PhilHealth shall contribute funding from their appropriations to sustain the operations of the HOSpital Accreditation Commission as the National Accrediting Body for Hospitals, subject to existing rules and regulations. 

4. Government hospitals shall include in their budget the funds necessary to obtain training of their staff and accreditation of the hospitals. 

VIII. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

In the event that any provision or part of this order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective. 

IX. REPEALING CLAUSE:

Unless otherwise stated, the provisions of previous issuances and other related orders that are inconsistent or contrary to this order are amended and repealed accordingly. 

X. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect immediately. 

</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

