Republic of the Philippines 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION 
<date>ND</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2013 - 0034 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Policies and Guidelines on the Afﬁliation of Higher Education Institutions with Hospitals and Other Health Facilities for the Training of Students' In Health Professional Education 
</subject>
<body>


JOINT ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 

COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION C
HED Memorandum Order NO. 55 Series 2013 

WHEREAS, Higher Education Institutions (HEI) need to affiliate with hospitals and other health facilities for the supplemental learning experiences, clinical exposure and training of students Of the various health professions; 

WHEREAS, hospitals and other health facilities have developed and implemented different policies and procedures for affiliating with HEIs that are not aligned with the systems and standards required to facilitate the rational and ethical conduCt Of clinical trainings for students; 

WHEREAS, by virtue of Executive Order No. 102 “Redirecting the Functions and Operations of the Department Of Health”, the DOH was given the role as the protector of standards Of excellence in the training and education of health care providers at all levels of the health care system

WHEREAS, Section 8 of Republic Act 7722 “Higher Education Act of 1994” mandates the Commission on Higher Education tO formulate and recommend development plans, policies, standards, priorities, and programs on higher education and research as well as to monitor and evaluate the performance of programs and institutions of higher learning; 

WHEREAS, there is a need to provide the standard guidelines for the affiliation of Higher Education Institutions with hospital and other health facilities for the purpose of providing the appropriate clinical training and exposure to students Of the programs under the CHED Technical Panel for Health Professions Education namely: (1) Dentistry Education, (2) Medical Technology Education, (3) Medical Education, (4) Midwifery Education, (5) Nursing Education, (6) Nutrition and Dietetics Education, (7) Occupational Therapy Education, (8) Optometry Education, (9) Pharmacy Education, (10) Physical Therapy Education, (11) Radiologic Technology Education, (12) Respiratory Therapy Education and (13) Speech Pathology Education;

NOW, THEREFORE, WE, the respective heads Of the Department Of Health and the Commission on Higher Education, by virtue of the powers vested in us by the Constitution 

and existing laws, do hereby instruct the following:

SECTION 1. Definition of Terms 

Accreditation —is the recognition Of a licensed health facility as having satisfied the standards for quality clinical training. 

Affiliation — the act by which a Higher Education Institution affiliates or merges with a hospital or health facility through a contract or a memorandum Of agreement. 

Affiliating Hospital/Health Facility - is a hospital or health facility being utilized by the HEIs in specialized areas for supplementary clinical learning Of students. 

Bed Capacity — or Authorized bed; the approved number Of beds as indicated in the hospital/health facility’s issued License to Operate. 

Base Hospital - is a hospital with departmentalized clinical services where the major components of the clinical rotations are held. 

Clinical Rotation — refers to the clinical exposure gained by students by rotating in the different areas or departments Of the hospital/health facility. 

Contract of Affiliation (COA) - is a legal document between the HEI and the affiliating hospital/health facility. The COA shall contain provisions for acquisition Of clinical skills Of students In specialized areas. 

Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) - is a legal document that shows the term Of references between the HEI and the base hospital. The MOA shall contain provisions for the establishment and maintenance of an environment conducive towards the attainment Of the teaching-learning Objectives. 

SECTION 2. Accreditation of Hospitals and Health Facilities utilized for the Clinical Training of Students . 

Minimum requirements and qualification for accreditation Of hospitals and other health facilities as base or affiliating hospital/facility such as, but not limited to, training facilities, training coordinator, hospital equipments, bed capacity and patient load, shall be set by CHED through the Technical Committees of the various health professions. 

A CHED Certificate Of Accreditation shall be issued to the hospital or health facility, which indicates a period Of validity. Affiliating hospitals and health facilities must comply with the minimum requirements set by CHED in order to sustain their accreditation. 

SECTION 3. Affiliation of Higher Education Institutions (HEI) with Hospitals and Health Facilities 

There shall be a Memorandum Of Agreement (MOA) between the HEI and the base hospital where majority of the training components and clinical rotations are held. 

There shall be a Contract of Affiliation (COA) between the HEI and the affiliating hospital or health facility where supplementary clinical learnings are gained. 

The MOA/COA should indicate the nature Of the agreement, responsibilities of both parties, schedule of fees, reflectivity and duration of the agreement, and other items deemed necessary by both parties. A standard template of the MOA/COA can be provided by the Technical Committees per profession. 

The CHED-Office of Programs and Standards and DOH» Health Human Resource Development Bureau shall be furnished with a copy Of the MOA/COA for monitoring purposes. 

SECTION 4. Clinical Training of Students in Hospitals and Health Facilities 

The HEI shall be responsible for the clinical training of students which involves the following functions: 1) appointment of clinical faculty or preceptor, 2) development of clinical rotation plan and schedule, 3) establishing ethics and behavior Of faculty and students in the clinical area, 4) evaluation of the adequacy and effectiveness of the hospital/health facilities as venue for clinical training, and 5) compliance with the student-to-patient ratio allowed by the hOSpital or health facility. 

SECTION 5. Student-to-Patient Ratio 

The standard ratio of students to patients shall be set by the Technical Committees per health profession in order to facilitate a suitable learning experience for the students. 

The allowable bed capacity of the base or affiliating hospital should determine the maximum number of students assigned for clinical rotation at any given time. In effect, the hospital bed capacity of the base or affiliating hospital can limit the number of students to be accepted by the concerned HEI. ' 

SECTION 6. Collect-ion of Affiliation Fees 

The corresponding affiliation fees for the clinical training of students shall be charged to the concerned HEI who directly settles payment to the hospital or health facility. Standard rates for affiliation fees and its distribution can be set by the CHED Technical Committees per profession, in consultation with the DOH and hospital/health facility representatives. 

Affiliation fees shall be included in the matriculation fees; no fees should be collected by the hospital or health facility from the students. 

SECTION 7. Role and Functions of the Commission on Higher Education 

The Commission on Higher Education shall: 

a) Develop, promulgate and implement clinical training and affiliation guidelines speciﬁc to a particular health profession through the respective Technical Committees. 

b) Set standards and criteria for, but not limited to, the following: accreditation of affiliating health facilities, allowable student-to-patient ratio, and affiliation fees to be charged by HEls to the students. 

c) Conduct inspection and assessment of affiliating hospitals and health facility, along with the monitoring of HEIs, through the respective CHED Technical Committees. 

d) In coordination with DOH, monitor the implementation of this Joint Order 

SECTION 8. Role and Functions of the Department of Health 

The Department of Health shall: 

a) Provide an updated annual list of licensed hospitals and other health facilities that may be accredited by the CHED for affiliation. 

b) Collaborate with CHED on the mapping of accredited hospitals and health facilities vis—a-vis HEls Offering health professional programs. 

c) Encourage and support upgrading of facilities in hospitals and other health facilities to comply with the accreditation criteria set by CHED. 

d) In coordination with CHED, monitor the implementation of this Joint Order 

SECTION 9. Violations and Sanctions 

Non—compliance with any Of the provisions of this Order shall be subject to revocation of CHED Accreditation of the health facility subject to due process. 

HEIs that were found to be in violation of the provisions of this Order shall be subject to revocation of program permit or recognition after due process. 

SECTION 10. Repealing Clause 

Administrative Order No. 5-A s. 1996 “Revised Policies, Procedures, and Guidelines Governing Affiliation and Training of Students in the Department of Health Hospitals and Other Government Health Facilities” and all other orders and related issuances are hereby repealed/rescinded. ' 

SECTION 11. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect immediately upon approval.

Done in the city of manila: margin this 7th day of November in the year of our Lord two thousand and thirteen. 
</body>

 <sign>DR. PATRICIA B. LICUANAN</sign>
<signtitle>Chairperson 
Commission Higher Education </signtitle>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 

