Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>11/13/2014</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2014 - 0044 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Installation of Human Resource for Health Management and Development Systems for Health and Allied Health Professionals Employed Within a Service Delivery Network (SDN), Including the Assessment and Monitoring of Clinical Competencies, Baseline Competencies and Standards </subject>
<body>

I. RATIONALE 

Pursuant to the provisions of Rule IV Section 4 and Rule VI Section 3 of Republic Act No. 10351 entitled “An Act Restructuring the Excise Tax on Alcohol and Tobacco Products by Amending Sections 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 8 131 and 288 of Republic Act No. 8424, Otherwise known as the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as Amended by Republic Act No. 9334, and for Other Purposes”; and, Joint Circular No. 001.2014 of the Department of Finance, Bureau of Internal Revenue, Department of Health, Department of Budget and Management, and the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Health is mandated to implement policies, programs and activities to ensure that competencies of hired and employed health and allied health professionals working within the Service Delivery Network are measured and relevant. 

This Order provides guidelines to institutionalize mechanisms to install critical human resource management and development systems in service delivery network health facilities, as deﬁned by the Department, for purposes of RA 10351. These systems are to ensure that health and allied health professionals that are hired and employed have the necessary competencies needed to work as a critical component of the service delivery network. This Order also revises Administrative Order 2006-0031 entitled: “Guidelines for Operationalizing the Competency- Based Human Resources for Health Management and Development (HRHMD) System”. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

To provide guidelines for the institutionalization of critical HRHMD systems in health facilities under the service delivery network. 

III. SCOPE 

These guidelines are applicable to, and shall be implemented by all national and local health facilities, both public and private, within the Service Delivery Network. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

A. "Act” refers to Republic Act No. 10351 otherwise known, as the “An Act Restructuring the Excise Tax on Alcoholand Tobacco Products by Amending Sections 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 8 131 and 288 of Republic Act No. 8424, Otherwise known as the National Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as Amended by Republic Act No. 9334, and for Other Purposes” f) 



B. “SDN Health Facilities” refers to all public and private health facilities that function within the Service Delivery Network as deﬁned by the Department of Health (AO no. 2012-0012 “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines”) These include the following: 

1. Barangay Health Stations 

2. Rural Health Units/Health Centers 

3. Municipal Health Ofﬁces 

4. Level 1 hospitals 

5. Level 2 hospitals 

6. Level 3 hospitals 

7. Other Health Facilities 


C. “HRHMD Systems” refers to the set of ﬁve Human Resources for Health Management and Development Systems that are designed to achieve quality of work life characterized by productivity, human resource development and readiness of HRH for change and innovation. These systems include the following: 

1. "Human Resource for Health Planning” refers to the system of determining the human resource for health requirement and competencies each employee should possess and demonstrate anchored to the facility’s VMG and mandates 

2. “Job-Related Recruitment and Selection” refers to a system that uses a competency- based approach to recruit and select human resources for health within the SDN. It ensures that: job requirements and competencies are deﬁned in the organization; that hired human resources for health possess the required competencies needed to perform their functions; and, that immediate investments in learning and development are minimal in the ﬁrst year of employment. 

3. “Performance Management System” refers to a system of monitoring, evaluating and discussing performances of employed human resources for health. This is conducted twice yearly; results of which are used as a basis for promotion and/or the provision of other performance-based incentives. 

4. “Learning and Development Needs Assessment” refers to a system of determining baseline competencies of employees; and, evaluating learning and development needs based on a set of competency standards that are appropriate to the job position held. It ensures that all interventions for human resources for health learning and development (formal education, on—the-job training, developmental assignments/rotations, etc) are based on competency development needs, and are aligned with the objectives of the organization and SDN. 

5. “Career Development and Management” refers to the conscious effort to plan and organize the potential career path of human resources for health, and includes the necessary steps taken to realize the plans developed 

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

A. All health facilities functioning within an SDN shall adopt policies to promote/ensure the rationalized recruitment, retention and continuing professional development of their employed health and allied health professionals, in compliance to the provisions of the Act. 

B. The implementation of national policies shall be regularly overseen and monitored by respective heads of facilities. 

C. The HRHMD Systems shall be the basis for the staff development/training plans of health facilities. 

D. Staff development/training plans shall be recognized as a requirement for PhilHealth provider accreditation and/ or renewal. 

VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES 

A. Adoption and installation of 5 HRHMD Systems 

1. All health facilities within an SDN shall adopt and install the ﬁve HRHMD Systems, or its equivalent. These systems shall be applicable to all health and allied health professionals hired and employed under government plantilla positiOns, and employees under plantilla positions seconded from SDN health facilities. 

2. Policies and systems equivalent to the ﬁve HRHMD Systems shall focus on: 

a. Installing an operational recruitment and selection system that determines the needed job-related competencies for each vacant post; and, recognizes these as a basis for selecting applicants. 

b. Installing an operational learning and development needs assessment system that determines priority competency gaps needed to perform job functions. 

The measurement of these gaps shall be based on a set of competency standards that are recognized by the Department of Health, Professional Regulation Commission and/or the Commission on Higher Education. The identiﬁed competency gaps shall be the basis for the administration of learning and development interventions such as, but not limited to: trainings, orientations, seminars, workshops, job rotations, secondment/assignment to other SDN health facilities, mentoring, coaching, and membership to technical working groups and committees. Competency gaps of employees are to be addressed with planned and priority interventions within 3 years; the compendium of competency gaps and planned interventions shall form a Staff Development Plan that shall be duly reviewed and approved by respective Provincial Health Teams and Ofﬁces. Staff development plans shall be updated yearly and recognized as a requirement for the renewal of PhilHealth provider accreditation. 

c. Installing a functional performance management system that shall have an evaluation and a management component. The performance evaluation component shall measure employee performance based on expected outputs for the position/job function. Performance evaluation shall be conducted twice a'year and shall be recognized as a major, but not the only, criteria for promotion and other special assignments. The performance management component shall consist of interventions conducted by the employee’s supervisor to improve employee performance whenever needed. 

d. Installing a career development and management system that deﬁnes the potential career path of an employee based on his/her assessed competency strengths and weaknesses; and, identiﬁes interventions to realize these career goals. Each employee shall have one individual career path/plan that shall also form the basis for developmental interventions, or attendance to continuing _ professional development activities/programs. /0 

e. Developing and implementing a workforce plan that identiﬁes the quantitative workforce gaps, HRHMD system gaps, and interventions. The health workforce plan shall consider employees or personnel hired under permanent and temporary employment or contracts. 

B. Documentation of System Functionality 

1. Evidences of system functionality, such as records of performance evaluation and target setting, screening process, records of competency assessment and conduct of interventions, accomplished career path tools and documentation of attendance to continuing professional development programs, shall be kept for future monitoring. 

2. The workforce and staff development plan shall be updated every 3 years 

C. Roles and Responsibilities 

1. The DOH Central Ofﬁce, through the Health Human Resource Development Bureau, shall: 

a. Conduct orientations of the competency-based systems to DOH regional ofﬁces; 

b. Assess and develop the capacities of DOH Regional Ofﬁces to act as technical advisory bodies to Provincial Health Teams and Ofﬁces; 

c. Develop and provide the necessary assessment tools based on clinical competency standards for health and allied health professionals as recognized by the Professional Regulation Commission and the Commission on Higher Education; 

d. Develop and provide the necessary assessment tools to monitor and track the progress of HRHMD Systems installation and operations for SDN health facilities; and, 

e. Develop capacities of DOH Regional Ofﬁces to act as technical advisory bodies to Provincial Health Teams and Ofﬁces. 

2. DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall: 

a. Conduct orientations of the competency-based systems to Provincial Health Teams and Ofﬁces; 

b. Develop capacities of provincial health teams and ofﬁces to act as technical advisory bodies for HRHMD Systems installation to municipal health ofﬁces and health facilities within their respective catchment areas; 

c. Oversee the performance of Provincial Health Teams and Ofﬁces in the assessment and installation of HRHMD Systems; and, 

d. Review and approve of the 3-year staff development plans of Level 3 SDN Health Facilities in accordance to national policies and frameworks, and under the guidance of DOH Central Ofﬁce. 

3. Provincial Health Teams and Ofﬁces shall: 

a. Provide the necessary tools, guidance and technical assistance to SDN health facilities for the adoption and installation of HRHMD systems and policies; b. Monitor the progress of HRHMD Systems installation at SDN health facility level and provide status updates to DOH Regional Ofﬁces; _' 0. Provide technical assistance in the crafting and monitoring of staff development plans; and,

4. PhilHealth shall: 

Recognize the 3-year staff development plans, as approved by respective Provincial Health Teams, as an integral requirement for health facility accreditation or renewal of accreditation. 

5. SDN Health Facilities shall: 

a. Adopt policies, tools and standards that endeavor to attract and retain its health and allied health professionals; and, to maintain the relevance of clinical competencies and provide continuing professional development for its health and allied health professionals 

b. Install the ﬁve HRHMD Systems, or its equivalent, provided that the outcomes are in favor of rationalized and competency-based recruitment and selection; workforce retention; competency-based learning and development; and, continuing professional development; 

c. Conduct an initial assessment of clinical and/or public health administration competencies, based on qualiﬁcation standards, for all health and allied health professionals working within the facility; 

d. Craft and submit to Provincial Health Teams their 3-year staff development plans that are based on the results of learning and development needs assessments in order to maintain the relevance of clinical and/or public health administration competencies of health and allied health professionals; and, 

e. Finance the interventions in the staff development plans as approved by their respective Provincial Health Teams. 

VII. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE If any provision in this order is declared unauthorized, unconstitutional or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen days after publication to an ofﬁcial on-line media or print media of general circulation. 
</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. ORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Seretary of Health</signtitle>
 

