Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>09/03/2014</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2014 - 0026 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Implementation of the Public Health Assistants Deployment Program. 
</subject>
<body>
 


I. RATIONALE 

The Department of Health (DOH) assists disadvantaged communities to strengthen their health systems through the deployment of health workers (i.e., doctors, nurses, midwives, dentists, medical technologists and nutritionists and dieticians). With the growing national interest to strengthen maternal and child health care service delivery, initiatives and resources for maternal and child mortality reduction have been increasing. The demands for public health and clinical interventions have likewise increased the workloads of rural—based and deployed health workforce. 

To strengthen the implementation of the Maternal, Newborn and Child Health and Nutrition (MNCHN) Strategy including immunization, the DOH has created a team of frontline workers — Community Health Teams to deliver integrated MNCI-IN services at the community level through Administrative Order 2008—0029. To increase the capacity of these teams to deliver healthcare services, the DOH is deploying Public Health Assistants to form part of the service providers of the MNCHN Service Delivery Network. Public Health Assistants are expected to improve the MNCI-m SDN’S capacity for strategic information generation and management. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This Order aims to provide a standard framework and guide for the implementation of the Public Health Assistants Deployment Program. 

III. SCOPE OF APPLICATION 

This Order shall apply to the DOH Central and Regional Offices, hired Public Health Assistants, and Local Government Units who are recipients of deployed Public Health Assistants. 

IV. IMPLEMENTING hiECHANISMS 

The procedure for the recruitment, selection, orientation, deployment and compensation shall follow the standard deployment processes of the DOH-Health Human Resource Development Bureau (HI-IRDB). 

V. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES 

A. General Guidelines 

1. A healthcare professional can qualify to apply as a Public Health Assistant. 

2. Public Health Assistants shall form part of the service providers of the Maternal, Newborn and Child Health and Nutrition (MNCI-DJ) Service Delivery Network; including immunization 


3. Each region will be assigned twelve (12) Public Health Assistants to provinces and cities. The Regional Ofﬁce and DOH-ARMM shall determine the equitable distribution within their regions taking into consideration the safety and security of the deployed; and the capacity of local government units to receive and support the Public Health Assistants. 

4. Public Health Assistants shall be hired on a Contract of Service status with a monthly compensation of Php14,931.00 starting September 1 to December 2014. Travel expenses shall likewise be provided not to exceed Php2,000.00 per month. Public Health Assistants who resigns will be replaced and shall continue the remaining months of the contract. 

5. The Regional Ofﬁces, through their respective cluster heads and in close collaboration with the DOH-Family Health Ofﬁce (FHO) and the Health Human Resource Development Bureau (HHRDB) shall monitor the implementation of the project. DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall endeavor to resolve issues and challenges raised at local levels. The DOH-HHRDB shall attend to issues that cannot be resolved by DOH Regional Ofﬁces, or issues that arise from this written Order. 

B. Speciﬁc Guidelines 

1. Recruitment and Selection 

i. DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall determine their respective schedules for recruitment and selection within August 2014. 

ii. Interested parties shall apply directly to DOH Regional Ofﬁces using the ofﬁcial DOH PHA Deployment application form and undergo respective selection processes. Only applicants that have presented complete and valid documentary requirements shall be processed for evaluation. 

iii. Priority shall be granted to applicants who shall reside in the provinces and cities identiﬁed by the regional ofﬁces. 

iv. The following are minimum requirements for applicants:

1. Graduate of a 4 year health allied degree; 
2. Physically and mentally ﬁt; 
3. Not over 40 years of age. 

v. DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall forward their list of successful applicants to the DOH-HHRDB for processing of contracts and agreements. 

vi. Public Health Assistants shall enter into a Contract of Service with the DOH to signify formal engagement into the program. The Contract shall contain the intended area of assignment 

vii. Expenses related to the recruitment and selection activities will be shouldered by DOH Regional Ofﬁces 

2. Pre-deployment Preparations and Deployment 

i. Standard pre—deployment orientations shall be conducted by DOH Regional Ofﬁces for all Public Health Assistants prior to deployment. 


ii. The orientation shall focus on the MNCHN Strategy, National Immunization Program and the programs projects thereat. 

iii. Public Health Assistants shall submit their Daily Time Records monthly as a basis for compensation. 

In the same manner, Public Health assistants shall submit the following for the payment of their travel Expenses Voucher: 

1. Approved itinerary (appendix A) 

2. Certiﬁcate of travel completed (appendix B) 

3. Regional Order 

4. Certiﬁcate of Appearance 

5. Tickets Reimbursement Expenses Receipt using approved prevailing rates of the local area. 

6. Reports 


3. Monitoring and Evaluation 

1. DOH Regional Offices shall be responsible for the monitoring of the project and conduct of evaluation at the end of the 4”“ month of deployment. 


ii. Public Health Assistants will be monitored by DOH Regional Ofﬁces through their respective provincial health teams and shall be guided of their tasks accordingly. 


iii. Terminal assessment reports that contain Public Health Assistants and program performance shall be submitted to the DOH-FHO copy furnished the HHRDB. 


VI. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

A. The DOH-Central Ofﬁce shall: 

1. The DOH_FHO in collaboration with the HHRDB shall provide the necessary guidelines, contracts, agreements, technical assistance and directions of the project and oversee its implementation, including the conduct of orientations for DOH Regional Ofﬁces 

2. The DOH—FHO shall provide ﬁnancial resources for the compensation and transportation expenses of Public Health Assistants 

3. The HHRDB shall set the minimum requirements for application into the project. 

4. The DOH-FHO shall provide the standard pre-deployment orientation program for DOH Regional Ofﬁces 

B. The Operational Clusters through the DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall: 

1. Oversee implementation of the project at the regional level. 

2. Ensure fair, objective and transparent recruitment and selection processes. 

3. Facilitate the signing of necessary contracts and agreements. 


4. Conduct pre-deployment orientations and social preparations in provinces and cities to receive the Public Health Assistants. 

5. Conduct an evaluation of Public Health Assistants performance and project performance at the end of the 4th month of deployment. 

6. Exercise administrative and technical supervision over the Public Health Assistants 

7. Support ﬁeld health activities, and learning and development activities of the Public Health Assistants relevant to the implementation of MNCHN strategies, thrusts and policies 

C. The recipient Local Government Unit shall: 

1. Ensure the safety and security of the Public Health Assistants.

2. Refer relevant issues and concerns to DOH Regional Offices. 

3. Endeavor to hire Public Health Assistants that have displayed exemplary performances in the delivery of MNCHN care. 

D. The Public Health Assistant shall: 


1. Engage in a 4 month contract with the DOH 

2. Work under the direct supervision of the DOH regional ofﬁce with close coordination with the provincialfCity Health Ofﬁcer or the designated ofﬁcer-in-charge 

3. Implement and strengthen MNCI-IN projects, programs and activities, aligned with the MNCHN Strategy Manual of Operations, in their catchment areas 

4. Assist in the implementation of the National Immunization Program 

5. Submit necessary documents and records to the DOH for purposes of compensation, program evaluation and MNCHN progress monitoring 

6. Immediately report to the immediate supervisor, DOH Regional Ofﬁce, or the HHRDB as necessary, any untoward events that can threaten his/her safety and security, or the safety and security of hisfher community. 

7. Conduct health education and training. 

8. Submits monthly accomplishment report and DTRs to the CHDs describing the highlights of their activities, targets and accomplishment, learning insights, issues/concerns and recommendation and 

9. Performs other related functions as may be assigned. 

 

VII. EFFECTIVITY 

These guidelines shall take effect immediately 

</body>
 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
 

