Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>09/05/2014</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2014 - 0028 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 7943 An Act Converting the Atrial Paknak General Hospital in  Marawi Gig, Lanao Del Sig. into a Medical Center; to be Known as the Amai Pakpak Medical Center and Appropriatipg Funds Therefor.” </subject>
<body>

I. Rationale/Background 

The Amai Pakpalt Medical Center (APMC) is located at Barangay Saber, City of Marawi, Province of Lanao del Sur. The heapital was originally built by the US Anny 2711‘ Infantry Cavalry Division in 1903 by Captain John “Black lac ” J. Pershing as part of the four military buildings sprawling on a 20-hectare land in what used to be called Camp Marahui then later Camp Keithley. 

It was in 1910 during a cholera outbreak that this military facility was converted and organized into a 25-bed hospital by Captain James Allies, who also became its ﬁrst Chief of Hospital. It was named Lanao General Hospital which was popularly known to the locals as Public Hospital even after Lanao Province was divided in May 27, 1959 into two separate provinces of Lanao del. Sat and Lease del None. 

In the 1940’s its bed capacity was increased from 25 to 75 beds thus categorizing it as a Provincial Hospital serving the populace of Lanao province. In 19705 it was renamed Funai Pakpak General Hospital (APGH) in honor of the late Amai Pakpak, whose real name was Datu Akadir Akobar, a Maranao hero who fought against the Spaniards in the famous Battle of Marawi in 1895. 

In 1984, the APGH was integrated into the Provincial Health Ofﬁce of Lanao del 3111‘ under the supervision of the Integrated Provincial Health Ofﬁce (lPHO) until its devolution to the Local Government in 1991. Although the hospital was devolved, its hospital beds were increased from 75 to 100 beds by virtue of Republic Act No. 7217 that was approved on March 6, 1992. 

Difﬁculties in ﬁnancial operation were encountered by the hospital on account of inadequate hunting for its Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses {MOOEJ during its devolution. Moreover, the occupancy rate of APMC escalated, thus justifying the re- nationalization and conversion of Amai Pakpak General Hospital into Amai Pakpak Medical Center by virtue of Republic Act No. 7943 or “An Act Converting the Amai Pa'kpak General Hospital in Marawi City, lanao Del Sur, into a Medical Center, to be Known as the Amai Pakpak Medical Center, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” The conversion bill was sponsored by the late Congressman Mamintal “Mike” M. Adiong, Sr. which was signed into law by then President Fidel V. Ramos on March 3, 1995. Its implementation, however, only took effect in January 1999. 

The increasing number of hospital clients was reﬂected in its annual statistical reports. For the last three (3) years, 2011, 2012 and 2013, its average bed occupancy rate was 106.71%.The baseline of this bed occupancy ratio is .150 beds which is the authorized bed capacity of the hospital as per license to operate November 201 1 up to present. The most leading causes of morbidity and mortality were secondary and tertiary cases in nature. Primary cases were also served considering the fact that APMC serves as the referral hospital of the Province of Lease del Sur and other neighboring municipalities of the Province of Bukidnon and Lanao Del None. 

II. Objective 

This Administrative Order sets the implementing Rules and Regulations for the implementation of the Republic Act No. 7943,“An Act Converting the Amai Pakpak General Hospital in Marawi City, Lanao del Sur, into a Medical Center, to be known as the Amai Pakpak Medical Center, and Appropriaﬁng Funds Therefor.” 

III. Deﬁnition of Terms I Acronyms 

1. Act -refers to Republic Act No. 7943 or RA. 7943 otherwise known as “An Act Converting the Amai Pakpak General Hospital in Marawi City, Lanao Del Sur, into a Medical Center, to be Known as the Amai Pakpak Medical Center, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

2. APMC —— refers to Arnai Pakpak Medical Center, the current name of the hospital. 

3. no No. 2012-0012 — Refers to “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and other Health Facilities in the Philippines”, dated July 13, 2012. 

4. Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds offered by the hospital for inpatient care. 


5. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) -— refers to the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period; the ideal or recommended BO'R is from 65% to 85 v..- 

6. HOMIS — refers to Hospital Operations and Management Information System. 

7. IHOMP — refers to Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program. 

8. IRR - refers to the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 7943. 

9. Level 3— refers to DOH Classiﬁcation of APMC as deﬁned by AO 2012-0012. 

10. Referral Hospital *- refers to a health care institution capable of accepting referrals from lower level hospitals and renders general and specialized health care services. 

IV. Policies And Guidelines 

A. General Policies 

The APMC as a general, teaching and training hospital with a three hundred (300) bed capacity to be implemented by phases for a period of four (4) years shall provide tertiary general health care services and fully equipped with all the updated facilities, equipment and health human resource complement for a medical center facility. The APMC shall be provided with funds (PS, MOOE and CO) appropriate and adequate for a medical center. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of the upgrading of the Republic Act No. 7943,“An Act Converting the Amai Pakpak General Hospital in Martini City, Lanao del Sur, into a Medical Center, to be Known as the Aniai .Pakpak Medical Center, and Appropriating Funds Therefor,” the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

By the end of 2015, the APl'viC shall be a fully operational Level-Ill tertiary teaching and training hospital with an implementing capacity of 300 beds to be implemented by phases for a period of four (4) years. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The APMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure, rights of its human resource, upgrade their positions and hire additional staff to comply and conform with the DOl-l standards as per DBM+DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-1, “Revised Standards on Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern of Government Hospitals CY 2013 Edition” dated September 23, 2013. 


3. Equipment 

The APMC shall make an inventory of all existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to the DOI-I standards fitted for a tertiary level III medical Center. Listings for this are found in the Hospital Development Plan which is attached and form part of this order. 

4. Infrastructure 

The APMC shall implement construction, repair and renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and DOH standards especially for licensing purposes as per AO No. 20120012. 

5. Systems Development 

The APMC shall develop and implement standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, personnel and clientele of the hospital. It shall sustain the implementation of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program {IHOMP}. 

6. Quality Management 

The APMC shall implement, maintain and sustain the ISO 9001:2008 standards, Continuing Quality Improvement Program, Patient Safety Program, policies and standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhiIHealth) and other health standards provided by the international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

V. Implementing Structure 

A. Administrative Control 

The highest DOH designated official for Northern Mindanao DOH Hospitals shall have an oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations and shall monitor the implementation of RA 7943 guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Medical Center Chief of APMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOl-l-Central Office 

B. Source of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 7943 shall be sourced out accordingly. 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (6AA), hospital revenues, Philippine Health Insurance corporation (PhiIHealth) reimbursements and other mode of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2. The additional Maintenance, Operating and Other Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital revenue, Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) reimbursements and other sources. 

3. Personal Services to carry out the full implementation of the approved hospital stafﬁng pattern of a SOD-bed capacity hospital shall be sourced from the GAA 2014 onwards as provided in DOl-I-DBM Joint Circular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013. 

4. Release of funds shall be approved by the designated appropriate authority. 

VI. Repealing/Separability Clause 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VI. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15} days after publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation. 

</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

