Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>04/08/2014</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2014 - 0014 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Department of Health Anaesthesia Care Nursing Program </subject>
<body>

 



I. RATIONALE: 

The DOH with its legal mandate to promote the health and well-being of every Filipino serves as the lead agency in ensuring equity, access and quality of health care services through policy formulation, standards development and regulations; it also serves as technical oversight agency in charge of monitoring and evaluating the implementation of health programs, projects, research, training and services. By virtue of Executive Order 102 (‘Redirecting the Functions and Operations of the Department of Health ’), it was given the power to: “Ensure quality of training and health human resource development at all levels or the health care system”. 

Administrative Order No. 2012-0012 known as the: “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classification of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines” orders that all hospitals shall provide basic hospital functions such as, but not limited to, acute medical and surgical services, anesthesia services, emergency and outpatient services, nursing service, dental service, with common diagnostic and support units as pathology, radiology, and pharmacy. 

With the new classification of hospitals, Level I hospitals at the minimum should have the capacity to deliver surgical and anesthesia services among others. However, with the current distribution of physicians, specialists and anesthesiologists in the country which is primarily urban—centered, there will be hospitals in the rural and remote areas that will continue to have a shortage of these human resources for health. 

Therefore, there is a need to develop competent nurses in anesthesia care who would assist the anaesthesiologists, especially in the rural Local Government Unit (LGU) hospitals towards improving access to surgical and anesthesia health services, in support of Universal Health Care. 

The DOH developed a comprehensive Anesthesia Care Nursing Training Program that will provide the structure and mechanism for the establishment of competency-based training and development for nurses in anesthesia care. This program will eventually give rise to a Supervised DOH Anesthesia Care Nursing program that will be available in identiﬁed DOH hospitals in areas of need to improve access to health care. 



This Order aims to provide the structure and guidelines for implementing the DOH Anesthesia Care Nursing Program in all hospitals capable of delivering surgical and anesthesia services. 

II. OBJECTIVES: 

1. To provide the organizational structure and mechanisms for the implementation of the DOH Anesthesia Care Nursing Program in participating hospitals at different levels of health care. 

2. To prescribe the guidelines for the establishment of competency—based training and development for nurses in the standard Anesthesia Care Nursing Course 

3. To prescribe mechanisms for program monitoring and evaluation. 

III. SCOPE

This Order shall apply to all DOH-retained regional hospitals and DOH-licensed LGU hospitals from Levels I to III. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

1. Competency — the ability to integrate knowledge, skills and attitudes through actual performance in the workplace setting. In the performance of nursing functions, competency is determined in relation to established standards of performance. 

2. Competency—Based Development —- composed of learning and development interventions which results in measurable performance. The criteria are expressed as outcome and assessment is a core component. 

3. Anesthesia Care Nursing —— a special area in the nursing practice that deals with the care of patients under anesthesia and assistance to anaesthesiologists pre intra- and post- operatively 

4. Anesthesia Care Nurse — a nurse trained and certiﬁed in Anesthesia Care Nursing and practices under the supervision of an anaesthesiologist 

5. Supervising Anesthesiologist — Board-eligible or a certiﬁed diplomate anaesthesiologist; a physician who completed an accredited anaesthesiology residency training program which has been approved by the corresponding medical specialty certiﬁcation board 

(Based an Administrative Order No. 2012-0012 “New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals ”) 

6. Level I hospitals -— has consulting specialists in: Medicine, Pediatrics, OB—Gyne and Surgery; has emergency and out-patient services; isolation facilities; surgical/matemity facilities; dental clinic; secondary clinical laboratory; a blood station; lSt level x-ray; and a pharmacy 

7. Level 11 hospitals — has all Level 1 requirements plus: departmentalized clinical services, respiratory unit, general ICU, high-risk pregnancy unit, NICU, tertiary clinical laboratory, and a 2nd level x—ray with mobile unit 

8. Level 111 hospitals -— has all Level 2 requirements plus: teaching/training with accredited residency training program in the 4 major clinical services, physical medicine and rehabilitation unit, ambulatory surgical clinic, dialysis clinic, tertiary lab with histopathology, blood bank, 3rd level X-ray



V. GENERAL GUIDELINES: 

1. Anesthesia Care Nursing shall be included as one of the specialty areas under the DOH Nurse Certiﬁcation Program (Department Order No. 2012-0181 “Guidelines on the Department of Health Nurse Certification Program ”). 

2. All hospitals, beginning from the Level I category, shall have Operating Room Capacity (as per DOH Administrative Order No. 2012—0012) and shall have at least 1 Anesthesia . Care Nurse supervised by an anaesthesiolo gist. 

3. All Level III DOH-retained hospitals with accredited residency training program in anesthesiology shall serve as training centers of Anesthesia Care Nursing 

4. DOH Specialty hospitals shall serve as trainers and resource persons 

5. All Anesthesia Care Nurses shall be supervised by an anaesthesiologist who are based in provincial hospitals 

6. All provincial referral hospitals shall have at least one supervising anaesthesiologist. 

VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES: 

1. Supervision of Training Program and Training Facilities 

a. The program shall be headed and supervised by DOH-HHRDB. 

b. All DOH-retained Level III hospitals with an accredited anesthesia residency training program are designated as training centers for the program. 

c. The training program shall be supervised by the Medical Center Chief and the Head of Anesthesiology Department at institution level 

d. DOH-designated training centers shall issue certiﬁcates to trainers upon completion of the training program. 

e. For government-employed nurses, training fees will be subsidized by the DOH subject to corresponding service obligation or return service in identiﬁed Level I hospitals in need of anesthesia care 

2. Criteria for Trainers a. Must have any of the following: 

i. Minimum of 5 years clinical experience 

ii. Supervisory functions as an Anesthesiologist 

iii. Certiﬁcate as a Certiﬁed Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA) 

iv. Certiﬁcate of Competency from the DOH NCP as an Anesthesia Care Nurse 

b. Must have acquired the necessary government certiﬁcation or accreditation authorizing the practice of anesthesiOlogy/anesthesia care nursing 

c. Must have the necessary teaching and communication skills 

3. Training Modules 

a. All training centers shall use the training modules prescribed by the DOH-HHRDB 

b. Training modules shall be reviewed every three (3) years by a pool of experts that will be designated by the DOH-HHRDB 

c. Duration of training is minimum of six (6) months, but may vary subject to the results of the trainee assessments and ﬁndings and recommendations from the module rev1ews 

Within the duration of the training, nurses will be required to undergo 24-hr duty subject to the requirements of the prescribed modules 

The scope of learning interventions is as follows: 

a) Level IIIadult patients (19 years old and above), 

b) Level IV — pediatric patients (18 years old and below), 

c) Level V —— adult and pediatric patients plus managerial and supervisory skills. 

4. Scope of Practice of DOH Anesthesia Care Nurse 

a. Shall be subject to the Scope of Nursing Practice as provided by the national professional law for nurses and other professional regulatory laws 

b. Shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following tasks under the supervision of an anesthesiologist: 


i. Assessment and monitoring of patient’s condition pre-
intra- and post- operatively 

ii. Assist the anesthesiologist 

iii. Administer prescribed medications 

iv. Start IV hydration or therapy 

v. Perform intubation 

vi. Perform regular inspection of anesthesia machine before each procedure, including the leak test 


c. In emergency and life—saving situations and in the absence of a supervising anesthesiologist, anesthesia care nurses may perform the procedures cited above upon proper referral. 

d. Scope of practice of Anesthesia Care Nurse may vary or be modiﬁed subject to existing national policies or government issuances 

5. Prerequisites for entry: 

a. Must be a practicing Critical Care Nurse with minimum of 1 year clinical experience in a critical care unit or must have completed a government accredited training program for critical care nursing 

b. Must have a recommendation from his/her Chief Nurse 

c. Must be a certiﬁed nurse in Intravenous (IV) therapy and Basic Life Support (BLS) and Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS) or have completed a DOH program in IV therapy, BLS and ACLS 

d. Must not be more than 50 yrs old at the time of application 

e. Government-employed nurses must submit to the DOH—HHRDB a copy of the perfected Scholarship Service Contract with their respective institutions. 

6. Liabilities 



a. The anesthesiologist in-charge of the surgical or emergency procedure shall be accountable for all legal liabilities that may be incurred by the Anesthesia Care Nurse being supervised. 

b. Anesthesia Care Nurses shall also be held liable for damages incurred when found acting out of his or her volition and without the supervision of an anesthesiologist. 

c. Hospitals shall be responsible for issuing the necessary implementing rules and regulations of the DOH anesthesia care nursing program to safeguard the rights and safety of the patient and its hospital staff. 

7. Monitoring and Evaluation 

a. DOH-HHRDB shall prescribe monitoring and evaluation tools to evaluate the Anesthesia Care Nursing training program 

b. All nurses under the program shall undergo a pre- and post- assessment of competencies in their respective training centers '

c. Recipient hospitals shall conduct monitoring of patient safety in their respective areas of jurisdiction. 

8. Certiﬁcation 

a. All nurses who would apply for a DOH Certiﬁcation shall undergo the assessment and certiﬁcation process prescribed by Department Order No. 2012—0181 “Guidelines on the Department of Health Nurse Certiﬁcation Program”. 

VII. REPEALING CLAUSE 

All other issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed/rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY DATE 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication to an ofﬁcial gazette or a newspaper of general circulation. 


</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


