Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>06/23/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0026 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines for the Public Health Associate Deployment Program (PHADP)</subject>
<body>
 
I. RATIONALE 

The overall goal of Universal Health Care or Kalusugan Pangkalahatan is to improve health outcomes, provide ﬁnancial risk protection and provide quality access to health services especially to the poor. With this, the Department of Health (DOH) through its Deployment of Human Resources for Health (HRH) Program deploys doctors, nurses, midwives, dentists and other health professional as a strategy in support to the attainment of Universal Health Care. While, the DOH deployed HRH and rural health based health workers are intense in providing public health and clinical services, there is also a need to strengthen the other administrative and managerial concerns. in the rural health unit such as operational health planning, researches, disease surveillance, staff capability building and program management. As such, the DOH has designed the Public Health Associate Deployment Project (PHADP) that will deploy Public Health Associates (PHAs) assigned in RHUs and work alongside with other HRH focusing on the implementation of DOH programs and health plans. 

PHADP is a two—year project to employ public health associates that shall be assigned in areas identiﬁed by the DOH taking in consideration the municipalities under the 43 provinces identiﬁed by the Department of Budget and Management as Focus Geographical Areas. 

To ensure success in the implementation of this project, this Order aims to provide structure and mechanism for the deployment of PHAs consistent to Administrative Order No. 2014—0025 dated September 1, 2014 regarding “Guidelines on the Deployment of Human Resources for Health (HRH). 

II. OBJECTIVES 

General Objective 

This Order aims to provide guidelines in the implementation of the Public Health Associate Deployment in support to the attainment of Universal Health Care or “Kalusugan Pangkalahatan” 

A. Specific Objectives 

-Provide a framework and strategies in the implementation of the deployment project; 

-Provide direction to implementers and other stakeholders of the deployment project. 


III. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

A. Public Health Associate Deployment Program (PHADP) — refers to deployment of health care professional as Public Health Associates to strengthen the other administrative and managerial concerns in the rural health unit and work alongside with other HRH focusing on the implementation of DOH programs and health plans. 

B. Human Resources For Health (HRH) —— refers to health professionals currently engaged in actions whose primary intent is to enhance health. They include physicians, nurses, midwives, dentists and allied health professionals. 

C. Public Health Associates (PHAs) — refers to healthcare professionals who are graduates of a four (4) year health allied degree/course. 

D. Focus Geographical Areas (FGA) —- refers to 43 provinces with high poverty magnitude, high poverty incidence and vulnerable to shocks and disasters. These type of provinces are determined by the Human Development and Poverty Reduction (HDPR) cluster that the FY 2015 budget must prioritize to achieve inclusive development. 

IV. SCOPE OF APPLICATION 

This Order shall apply to the DOH Central and Regional Ofﬁces, hired Public Health Associates and Local Government Units who are recipients of deployed Public Health Associates. 

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

A. The Department of Health shall hire PHAs to be deployed in Rural Health Units in the municipalities under the 43 provinces identiﬁed by the Department of Budget and Management as Focus Geographical Areas. 

B. After the satisfactory completion of their deployment, the PHAs shall be awarded with a Certiﬁcate of Completion and Employment. 

C. Expenses in the implementation of the PHADP shall be chargeable against the funds of the Family Health and Reproductive Health, Disease Prevention and Control Bureau. 

D. The DOH Regional Ofﬁces through their respective cluster heads in close collaboration with the Health Human Resource Development Bureau (HHRDB) and stakeholders shall monitor the implementation of the project. DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall endeavor to resolve issues and challenges raised at the local level. 

VI. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES 

A. General Guidelines 

a. A healthcare professional can qualify to apply as a Public Health Associates (PHAs). 

b. A distribution list shall be provided by the DOH Disease Prevention and Control Bureau (DCPB) to all DOH Regional Ofﬁces and DOH—ARMM. Subsequently, regional ofﬁces and DOH ARMM shall ﬁnalize/reallocate the equitable _ distribution within their regions taking into consideration (a) municipalities under the 43 provinces identiﬁed by the Department of Budget and Management as Focus Geographical Areas (b) security of the deployed personnel (c) capacity of the local government units to receive and support the PHAs. 

c. The PHAs shall be hired on a Contract of Service status under Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) with a monthly salary of P14,931.00 to be deployed in Rural Health Units. Their contract is for two (2) years, renewable every six (6) months based on a very satisfactory performance during their tour of duty. The LGUs are encouraged to provide additional monetary or non-monetary beneﬁts to PHAs. 

d. The PHAs shall be enrolled in the Government Service Insurance System (GSIS)— Group Personal Accident Insurance and Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) by the DOH Regional Ofﬁces. 

e. Expenses for the salaries, enrollment to GSIS insurance and PHIC, pre- deployment orientation of the PHAs shall be chargeable against the funds of the Family Health and Reproductive Health, Disease Prevention and Control Bureau. 

f. After the satisfactory completion of their deployment, the PHAs shall be awarded with a Certiﬁcate of Completion and Employment. 

B. Procedures in the Recruitment, Selection and Deployment of Applicants 

a. Pre-Deployment 

1. Recruitment and selection period will be within June 2015. The DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall set their timelines for accepting and selecting applications within the prescribed period. - 

2. Applicants shall accomplish the ofﬁcial project application form which can be downloaded through the DOH website www.doh.gov.ph/. 

3. Interested applicants shall apply directly to the DOH Regional Ofﬁces. Applications received by the DOH Central Ofﬁce shall be forwarded to the concerned DOH Regional Ofﬁces. 

4. Applicants shall be open to all graduate of a four (4) year health allied degree/course. Priority shall be given to applicants from the indigenous groups where the recipient municipalities are 10cated. 

5. Applicants shall undergo the recruitment and selection process of the DOH Regional Health Ofﬁces. 

6. PHAs must be physically and mentally ﬁt. A medical certiﬁcate from a government health facility is required before the start of employment. 

7. The ofﬁcially accepted PHAs shall be informed by the DOH regional Ofﬁce through a letter or email or any mode of communication available. The DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall submit the names of PHAs to HHRDB for proper documentation on or before May 31., 2015. All PHAs are required to attend the Pre-Deployment Orientation by the respective DOH regional ofﬁce before the start of deployment. 

8. The PHAs shall enter into a Contract of Service with the DOH to signify formal engagement into the program. The Contract shall contain the intended area of assignment and duration of the project. 

b. Deployment 

1. Prior to deployment, the accepted PHAs must be formally indorsed to the Local Government Executives (LCEs) by the DOH Regional Ofﬁces. 

2. The PHAs shall be assigned in Rural Health Units under the supervision of the DOH Provincial Health Leader/DOH Representative in close coordination with the Municipal Health Ofﬁcer or the designated ofﬁcer-in-charge. 

3. The project shall provide the PHAs with a salary of Php P14,931.00 per month. This shall be given in full for PHAs who has completed the number of working days. In case of absences and tardiness, the salary is subject to deductions based on the existing rules and regulations. 

4. The receiving facilities are encouraged to provide additional monetary or non-monetary incentives to PHAs in any of the following but not limited to: 


a. monthly allowance; 

b. meals or meal allowance during their tour of duty; 

c. transportation or transportation allowance to cover ﬁeld assignments; .
d. communication allowance

e. modest board and lodging whenever necessary and

f. training opportunities. 

C. The PHAs shall submit their Daily Time Record (DTRs) every 7th day of the month to their respective DOH Regional Ofﬁces as basis for the salary duly approved by the Regional Director and properly initialed by the DOH Provincial Health Team Leader/DOH Representative. 

D. The PHAs are also required to submit a monthly report as required by the DOH Central Ofﬁce and Regional Ofﬁces. The reports shall be submitted to their immediate supervisor for notation. These shall be forwarded to the DOH Regional Ofﬁces through their Provincial Health Team Leader/DOH Representative. The DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall consolidate the monthly accomplishment report to be submitted to HHRDB and DPCB. 

E. The DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall also conduct a midterm and end of deployment evaluation. The results of the evaluation shall be submitted to HHRDB as an input to the Program Implementation Review (PIR). 

c. Post-Deployment 

l. PHAs who complete the project shall be awarded with a Certiﬁcate of Employment signed by the DOH Regional Director. 

2. The PHAs shall be evaluated after every semester to measure their performance during their employment period. Only PHAs with very satisfactory performance are eligible to be renewed/rehire. 

3. The DOH Regional Ofﬁces through the ﬁnance unit shall submit a disbursement report every 10th day of the month to Finance Service and HHRDB. 

4. All savings incurred after the implementation of the project must be returned to DOH Finance Service at the end of the year. 

VII. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES A. The DOH—Central Ofﬁce shall: 

1. The HHRDB shall provide the necessary guidelines, contracts, agreements, technical assistance and directions of the project and oversee its implementation. 

2. The DOH shall provide ﬁnancial rescurces for the compensation of the PHAs and other expenses related to the implementation of the project chargeable against the funds of Family Health and Reproductive Health and Doctors to the Barrios Program Rural Health Practice Program. 

3. The HHRDB shall setthe minimum requirements for application into the project. 

4. The DCPB and HHRDB shall provide the standard pre—deployment orientation program for DOH Regional Ofﬁces. 

B. The Operational Cluster-s through the DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall: 

1. Implement the PHA deployment project. 

2. Ensure fair, objective and transparent recruitment and selection process. 

3. Facilitate the signing of necessary contracts and agreements. 

4. Conduct pre-deployment orientations and social preparations in the municipalities of the Public Health Associates. 

5. Conduct an evaluation of the Public Health Associates. performance and the progress of project every six (6) months of deployment. 

C. The recipient Local Government Unit shall: 

1. Enter into an agreement with the DOH for the implementation of the project. 

2. Exercise administrative and technical supervision over the Public Health Associates. 

3. Support ﬁeld health activities, and learning and development activities of the Public Health Associate relevant to the implementation of DOH programs and activities. 

4. Ensure the safety and security of the Public Health Associates. 

5. Refer relevant issues and concerns to DOH Regional Ofﬁces. 

6. Endeavor to hire Public Health Associates that have displayed exemplary performance. 

D. The Public Health Associate shall: 

1. Engage in a six (6) months contract with the Department of Health and Local Government Unit. Based on very satisfactory performance the PHA can be rehired for a maximum of two (2) years. 

2. Work under the direct supervision of the DOH Provincial Health Leader/DOH Representative in coordination with the Municipal Health Ofﬁcer or the designated ofﬁcer-in-charge. 

3. Submit necessary documents and records to the DOH for purposes of compensation, program monitoring and evaluation. 

4. Immediately report to their immediate supervisor, DOH Regional Ofﬁce, or the HHRDB as necessary, any untoward events that can threaten his/her safety and security, or the safety and security of his/her community. 

5. Assist inthe development of plans and strategies in the implementation of health programs, projects and activities. 

6. Provide technical support in the preparation of project proposals, plans and program, health promotion and communication materials and other related documents. 

7. Assist in the efﬁcient collection, validation, analysis of data and information. 

8. Assist in the installation of effective and efﬁcient M&E system for programs and projects. 

9. Develop and sustain logistics management systems. 

10. Performs other related functions as may be assigned. 


VIII. REPEALING CLAUSE 

Unless otherwise stated, provisions of Administrative Order No. 2014-0025 dated September 1, 2014 regarding “Guidelines on the Deployment of Human Resources for Health (HRH) and all other issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed/rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

IX. EFFECTIVITY 

These guidelines shall take effect immediately. 

</body>
<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>
