Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>08/03/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 034 </docnum>
<subject>Subject: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8454, “An Act Upgrading the Batanes Provincial Hospital in Basco, Batanes, to Tertiary Level II Hospital to be known as the Batanes General Hospital</subject>
<body>
	
I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The Batanes General Hospital (BGH) located at the northernmost part of the Philippines, originated as a public dispensary by virtue of the Philippine Rehabilitation Act of I946. It then- became a 25-bed capacity emergency hospital. With the passage Republic Act (RA) No. 5720 in 1969, Batanes Hospital was designated as a-National District Hospital under the Department of Health. Consequently, it was upgraded to a 50— bed. capacity hospital in 1974 and soon after in 1977, to a 75-bed capacity hospital. 

In 1984, the Public Health Services and the Hospital Services of Batanes Province were integrated and. became one under the Integrated Provincial Health Ofﬁce. 

RA No. 7160, known as the Local Government Code of 1991, authorized its devolution to the Provincial Government of Batanes and became the Batanes Provincial Health Ofﬁce in l993. 

With the passage of RA No. 8454 in 1998, BGH is re-nationalized and upgraded to a tertiary level [1 hospital, and is likewise renamed from Batanes Provincial Hospital to Batanes General Hospital. Being the only DOH—retained hospital in this smallest far- ﬂung island Province of Batanes, there’s an exigent need to upgrade its service capability to cope up with the needs of its clients. 

It is the mandated function of the hospital to provide quality health care to all through upgraded equipment and infrastructures, adequate and competent health human resources with upgraded resource capabilities, adequate medicines and supplies. 

At present, the Batanes General Hospital urgently needs to be improved, specifically its facilities and services, to adeptly handle emergency cases and to provide  quality and accessible health care to the constituents ofthe province.

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and. Regulations for the Implementation of RA No. 8454 “An Act Upgrading the Batanes Provincial Hospital in Basco, Batanes to Tertiary Level II Hospital to be known as the Batanes General Hospital.” 

III. SCOPE 

The Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative order shall pertain only to the provisions of RA No. 8454. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. Act — Republic Act No. 8454 “An Act Upgrading the Batanes Provincial Hospital in Basco, Batanes to Tertiary Level II Hospital to be known as the Batanes General Hospital.” 

2. BGH — refers to Batanes General Hospital 

3. DOH-CO-Department of Health-Central Ofﬁce 

4. Level 2 — a duly licensed DOH hospital in accordance with the requirements prescribed under DOH Administrative Order No 2012- 012 or the rules and regulations governing the new classiﬁcations of hospitals and other health facilities 1n the Philippines 

V.POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The BGH shall provide a Level 2 promotive, curative, and preventive health care services. It shall be fully equipped with necessary equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 2 health care facility. 

Furthermore, the BGH shall strengthen its'existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital, complementing the services of local government health care facilities in the province and the region. The. upgrading of service capability shall be consistent with the Development Plan of BGH. 

 

B. Implementing Guidelines 

In support of the implementation of RA No. 8454, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

The Batanes General Hospital shall operate as a 75—bed capacity, Level 2 hospital with trauma receiving capability. It shall be developed into a Center for Wellness and. be continuously upgraded to be a fully operational 75—bed Level 2 hospital by year 2020. Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established based on the Hospital DeveIOpment Plan. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The BGH shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resources, re-classify and/or upgrade positions, promote professional development and shall hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards and intent of RA No. 8454. 

The BGH shall increase its health personnel based on recommended stafﬁng pattern for a 75 bed capacity hospital following the DEM—DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals," CYZOIB Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All records of assets, movable and immovable, and records of the BGH as well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and these shall be accounted. for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The BGH shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform with DOH minimum standards of a Level 2 hospital as provided for under DOH AO No. 2012- 0012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of DOH. 

5. Infrastructure 

The BGH shall implement and seek the support of DOH for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure to conform with all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The BGH shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming with the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The BGH shall implement the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards. The BGH shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program, Patient Safety, policies and standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control 

The highest ranking designated DOH ofﬁcial or Head of the Ofﬁce for Health Operations shall have oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations of BGH. The DOH Regional Office No. 2 shall monitor the implementation of RA No. 8454 and may recommend further the necessary upgrading guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Chief of Hospital of BGH shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit. developmental plans, financial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce. 

B. Sourcing of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 8454 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be 

sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (6AA),- hospital income which includes PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2. The additional maintenance and other operating expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the .GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public—private partnership and/or other modes of ﬁnancing scheme. 

3. Personnel Services (PS) to carry out the full implementation of the stafﬁng pattern of 75 beds shall be implemented in compliance with DOH—DBM Joint CirCular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

4. Release of funds shall be approved by the designated appropriate authority. 

VII. REPEALING/SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions of previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>
<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>




