Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>03/13/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0011 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 9791, “An Act Amending Republic Act No. 7532, Converting the Batangas Regional Hospital to the Batangas Medical Center, Further Increasing its Bed Capacity to Five Hundred (500)Beds, Appropriating FundsTherefor” </subject>
<body>
 
I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

On January 1, 1927 the Batangas Medical Center, then known as Batangas Provincial Hospital, opened as a 30 bed hospital at its present site in Kumintang lbaba, Batangas City. By 1950, its bed capacity had increased to 80 beds. In 1962, it was designated as a teaching and training hospital with consequent increase in occupancy rate prompting a further increase in its bed capacity to 150 in 1975 and changing its name to Batangas Regional Hospital. During the devolution of health services by virtue of Local Government Code of 1991, Batangas Regional Hospital was one of the few government hospitals that were retained to DOH. Republic Act 7532 was then enacted in May 1992 further increasing its bed capacity to 250. 

From then on, Batangas Regional Hospital registered increasing bed occupancy rates with current rate exceeding 100% in the past 2 years. Contributing to this increase are patients coming from Region 4A (CALABARZON) and also from Region 48 (MIMAROPA). It is expected to increase its occupancy rates due to projected increase of population from present 11 million for Region 4A to 14 million by year 2020. Further, available hospital beds per 1,000 population is presently at 0.8 in Region 4A. 

Being the only Department of Health retained hospital in Region4B, it is expected to be in the forefront of implementing the government health sector agenda. Hence, the enactment ofRepublic Act 9791 converting it into Batangas Medical Center (BatMC) with bed capacity of 500 beds is considered a boost to its further development. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations to fast track the institutional development of BatMC in compliance with policy implementation requirements of Republic Act No. 9791 otherwise known as “An Act Amending Republic Act No. 7532, Converting the Batangas Regional Hospital to the Batangas Medical Center, further increasing its Bed Capacity to Five Hundred (500) Beds, Appropriating Funds Therefor”. 

DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. A0 No. 2012-0012- refers to "Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines",dated July18, 2012 

2. BatMC— refers to Batangas Medical Center 

3. Bed capacity- refers to the number of beds offered by the hospital forin- patient care. 

4. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR)- refers to the ratio of actual inpatient service days for agiven period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for thesame period, 

5. IHOMP- refers to Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program 

6. IRR- refers to the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No.9791 

7. Level 3- refers to the DOH Classification of BatMC as defined by A0 2012- 0012. 

8. RA No. 9791— refers to “An Act Amending Republic Act No. 7532, Converting the Batangas Regional Hospital to the Batangas Medical Center and Further Increasing its capacity to Five Hundred (500) Beds, Appropriating Funds Therefor” 

IV. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The BatMC shall provide a tertiary level of promotive, curative, preventive, and rehabilitative health care services and research. It shall be fully equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 3 health care facility. 

The BatMC shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a Level 3 general hospital. Its services complement the local government health care facilities in the province and the region. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the Development Plan of BatMC. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of the implementation of RA. 9791,“An Act Amending Republic Act No. 7532, Converting the Batangas Regional Hospital to the Batangas Medical Center, further increasing its Bed Capacity to Five Hundred (500) Beds, Appropriating Funds Therefor”, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

 
1. Expansion of Services 

The BatMC shall operate as a 500 bed Level 3 general hospital with additional services on cancer treatment, minimally invasive surgical care and renal transplantation services complemented withhigh end diagnostic services. Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established based on the Hospital Development Plan. The increase in bed capacity and commensurate services provided by the Act shall be fully achieved by the end of CY2016. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The BatMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource complement, re-classify and/or upgrade positions, promote professional development and hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards. 

The BatMC shall increase its health personnel based on recommended stafﬁng pattern for a 500 bed capacity hospital following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern of Government Hospitals” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All assets, movable and immovable, and records of the BatMCas well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and shall be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The BatMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH standards of a Level 3general hospital as provided for under DOH AO 2012-001.2. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of DOH. 

5. Infrastructure 

The BatMC shall implement and seek the support of the DOH for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development The BatMC shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The BatMC shall implement and maintain the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth), DOH standards and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

V. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control 

The highest DOHdesignated ofﬁcial or the Head of the Ofﬁce for Health Operations shall have oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations of BatMC. However, the Regional Ofﬁce No. 4A shall monitor the implementation of the Act guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Medical Center Chief of BatMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall periodically submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce. 

B. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 9791 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall besourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospitalincome which include Philhealth payments, Public—Private Partnershipand other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing governmentrules and regulations. 

2. The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE)resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA,hospital income which includes Philhealth payments, Public-Private Partnership and/or other sources. 

3. Personal Services to carry out the full implementation of the hospital stafﬁng pattern as provided for in this IRR shall be implemented in tranches in compliance with DBM-DOH Joint Circular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related similar issuances. 

4. Release of funds shall be approved by the appropriate authority duly recommended by the highest authority or Ofﬁce/ Cluster head. 

VI. REPEALING / SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 

  </body>

   <sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 

 

