Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>11/24/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 050 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: DESIGNATION OF THE RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR TROPICAL MEDICINE AS THE NATIONAL REFERENCE LABORATORY FOR ROTAVIRUS AND OTHER ENTERIC VIRUSES </subject>
<body>


I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 

Acute gastroenteritis is among the most common illnesses of humankind, and its associated morbidity and mortality are greatest among those at the extremes of age, children and the ”elderly. In developing countries, gastroenteritits is a common cause of death in children less than 5 years of age that can be linked to a wide variety of pathogens. Much of the gastroenteritis in children is caused by viruses belonging to four distinct families — rotaviruses, caliciviruses, astroviruses and adenoviruses. 

In the Philippines, diarrhea] disease belongs to 3rd leading cause of child mortality (Philippine Health Statistics 2009, DOH). There is limited data to measure burden of disease and other essential information for program implementation, planning and policy decision. The population of our country is continually beset with viral diarrhea] diseases such as rotavirus, norovirus, sapovirus, among many others. Many hospitals offer quick diagnostic tests and serological tests to identify the etiologic agents, to help clinicians deliver critical care to their patients. The importance of laboratory results especially coming ﬁom a national laboratory is crucial in the early detection of epidemics, formulation of an appropriate response, identiﬁcation of the burden of disease and evaluation of the impact of immunization. 

In 2012, the Department of Virology of the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM), a research facility and hospital for infectious cases of the Department of Health was designated as the National Rotavirus Laboratory after assessment by the World Health Organization (WHO). 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Order aims to designate the RITM Department of Virology as the National Reference Laboratory for Rotavirus and other Enteric Viruses. 

 
III. SCOPE/COVERAGE 

All referring laboratories of DOH-hospitals, LGU-hospitals, other government hospitals and private hospitals/laboratories. 

IV. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISMS 

A. Roles and Responsibilities 

A.1 DOH Ofﬁces: 

1. RITM shall provide management support for the continued operations of the National Reference Laboratory for Rotavirus and Other Enteric Viruses under the Department of Virology. 

2. DOH Epidemiology Bureau shall provide support for continued sentinel surveillance activities and outbreak investigations. 

3. DOH Disease Prevention and Control Bureau-Expanded Programme on Immunization shall provide support for surveillance activities and research for generating evidence as basis for programme policies and guidelines. 

4. DOH Regional Ofﬁce through Regional Epidemiology and Surveillance Unit shall provide support for sentinel site activities and outbreak investigations of viral diarrhea. 

A.2 Department of Virology, RITM as National Reference Laboratory for Rotavirus and other enteric viruses: 

1. Provide laboratory services in screening and conﬁrmation of stool specimens for rotavirus and other enteric viruses from referring hospitals/laboratories. 

1.1 Ensure proper collection and storage of fecal samples from rotavirus surveillance sites 

1.2 Perform screening and conﬁrmatory test for the detection of rotavirus and other enteric viruses. 

1.3 Perform genotyping on a subset of rotavirus positive fecal samples, and to refer all unsubtypable samples to RRL 

1.4 Participate in the quality assurance programme

-Performance of proﬁciency testing 
-Shipment of representative positive and negative fecal samples to RRL for conﬁrmation 
-Participation in the annual on—site assessment review of laboratory performance 

1.5 Report results and maintain continuous coordination/ communication with stakeholders. 

2. Train laboratory personnel in the diagnosis of enteric viruses.

3. Provide external quality assurance programme for laboratory diagnosis of enteric viruses. 

4. Evaluate test kits and reagents in coordination with Food and Drug Authority and Center for Device Regulation, Radiation Health and Research.

5. Develop and offer conﬁrmatory assays for other enteric viruses such as Norovirus, Astrovirus, Calicivirus, Sapovirus. 

6. Conduct surveillance and research. 

B. Funding Requirements 

The cost for sentinel surveillance and operations as NRL shall be supported through suballotments from the DOH Epidemiology Bureau, Expanded Programme on Immunization of the Family Health Ofﬁce and Food and Waterborne Diseases Program of the Enviromental and Occupational Health Ofﬁce under the DOH Disease Prevention and Control Bureau, MOOE of RITM and by the revenue collected and earned from the various activities and services of RITM. 

V. REPEALING CLAUSE 

Department Order 393-E s. 2000 and other related issuances inconsistent or contrary with the provisions of this Order are hereby revised, modiﬁed, repealed or rescinded accordingly. All other provisions of existing issuances which are not affected by this Order shall remain valid and in effect. 

VI. EFFECTIVITY 

This order shall take effect immediately. 

</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


