Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>11/04/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 046 </docnum>
<subject>Subject: Implementing Rules and. Rulations of Republic Act No. 8543 Known as “An Act Converting the Basilan General Hospital in the MunityLality of Isabela, Province of Basilan into a Tertiary Hospital Under the Full Administrative and Technical Supervision of the Department of Health increasing its Capacity to One Hundred (100) Beds: and Appropriating Funds Therefor”</subject>
<body>
 

 
I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The Basilan Provincial Hospital (BPH), located in the City of Isabela, started as the Integrated Provincial Health Ofﬁce (LPHO) under the national government from 1982 to 1987. In 1988, the hospital was renamed as the Provincial Health Ofﬁce (PHO) under the administrative supervision of the Provincial Government of Basilan. 

The island Province of Basilan is composed of eleven (11) municipalities, one (1) city and one (1) chartered city. The City of lsabeia, where the B-asilan' Provincial Hospital is located, is the chartered city and capital of the province. Basilan Province is under the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) but the City of Isabela opted to be under Region IX. 

By virtue of RA No. 8543 approved on February 23, 1998, converting the BPH into a 100 bed capacity tertiary general hospital, the hospital was in effect renationalized. The BPH was formally turned over to the National Government on July 16, 2001 thru a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between Hon. Ustadz Wahab Akbar, Governor of Basilan at that time and Secretary Manuel M. Dayrit representing the Department of Health. The BPH was renamed, Basilan General Hospital (BGH). However, RA No. 8543 had not been fully implemented. There was no signiﬁcant increase in the annual budget for the hospital operations, i.e. Personal Services (PS) and Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE), and budget allocations for the BGH remained appropriate for a 25-Bed Capacity hospital- Due to inadequacy of resources for the hospital operations, the quality of health services has been compromised. 


The upgrading of the Basilan General Hospital into a 100 bed capacity hospital shall fulﬁll the goal to serve as a responsive hospital to the demands of the entire population of Basilan and its nearby island population. Referrals to Zamboanga City will be minimized and in the process decongest the ever loaded Zamboanga City Medical Center. 


II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA No. 8543 for the conversion of BPH into a tertiary level Basilan General Hospital (BGH) with corresponding increase of health human resource complements for a hospital with one hundred bed capacity under the Department of Health. 

III. SCOPE 

The Implementing Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall pertain only to provisions of RA No. 8543. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. Act — refers here to Republic Act No. 8543entitled “An Act Converting the Basilan General Hospital in the Municipality of Isabela, Province of Basilan, into a Tertiary Hospital Under the Full Administrative and Technical Supervision of the Department of Health increasing its Capacity to One Hundred (100) Beds, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.”  

2. BGH -— refers to Basilan General Hospital 

3. DBM — Department of Budget and Management 

4. Departmentalization — refers to the reorganization of the present medical and nursing stafﬁng into the different specialized and functional components or departments for tertiary care. 

5. General Hospital -—refers to a health facility providing services for all types of deformity, disease, illness or injury. 

6. Hospital Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds made available for inpatient care authorized by Law. 

7. Hospital Capability — refers to the level of care the hospital can provide such that DOH issues license to operate the hospital in accordance with its capability as Level I (pertaining to basic hospital care with surgical and ancillary services), Level II (pertaining to capabilities more than performing emergency, surgery in addition to basic hospital care), and Level III (pertaining to more than Level II, intensive and sophisticated hospital care in addition to training and teaching) based on the new classiﬁcation of hospitals provided on AO No. 2012-0012 dated J uly 18, 2012. 

V. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. GENERAL POLICIES 

The BGH shall provide tertiary general health care with 100 bed capacity. It shall be fully equipped with necessary equipment and facilities that are complemented by adequate number of competent health human resources appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 3 hospital. 

B. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISMS                

In support of the implementation of RA. 8543, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

The BGH shall operate as a lOO-bed Level 2 hospital with specialized areas of maternal care and child health care, and shall be fully equipped with all the updated facilities, equipment and well-trained health human resources complement to provide tertiary health care services. The incremental annual increase in bed capacity and commensurate services provided by the Act shall be achieved according to the approved hospital development plan for BGH. 

2. Structural Reorganization 
The hospital shall implement the creation of various departments/service components that shall be headed by a Department Head appointed by the Chief of Hospital. The Department Head shall also endeavor to apply for the required specialty accreditation of any but not limited to the following: 

a. Department of Medicine 

b. Department of General Surgery 

c. Department of Anesthesia 

d. Department of Pediatrics 

e. Department of OB-Gynecology 

f. Department of Ophthalmology 

g. Department of EENT  

h. Department of Pathology and Laboratory 

i. Department of Radiology 


3. Health Human Resource The BGH shall continue to honor the positions, seniority, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource complement, re-classify and /or upgrade positions, promote professional development and hire additional staff to comply and conform with the DOH standards and intent of RA No. 8543. 

The BGH shall increase the number of its health personnel based on recommended stafﬁng pattern for a 100 bed capacity hospital following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern of Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

4. Assets and Liabilities 

All records of assets, movable and immovable, and records of the BGH as well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and these shall be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

5. Equipment 

The BGH shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform with DOH minimum standards for licensing as provided for under DOH AO No. 2012-0012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of DOH. 

6. Infrastructure 

The BGH shall implement and seek the support of the DOH for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure to conform with all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

7. Systems Development 

The BGH shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety fer patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

8. Quality Management 

The BGH shall implement the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards. The BGH shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program, Patient Safety, policies and standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

1. Administrative Control

The Head of the Ofﬁce for Health Operations, in coordination with the DOH Regional Director of the Zamboanga Peninsula, shall have oversight jurisdiction and control over the hospital operations of Bastian General Hospital. DOH Regional Ofﬁce No. IX shall monitor the implementation of Republic Act No. 8543 and may recommend further the necessary upgrading guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Chief of Hospital of BGH shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce. 

2. Sourcing and Use of Funds . The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of RA. N08543 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

2.1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2.2. The additional maintenance and other operating expenses (MODE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public—private partnership andfor other modes of ﬁnancing scheme. 

2.3.Personal Services (PS) to carry out the full implementation of the staffing pattern of 100 beds shall be implemented in compliance with DOH—DBM Joint Circular 2013—01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

2.4. Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority. 

VII. REPEALING / SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY 
This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (IS) days after publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 

 </body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


