Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>08/03/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 035 </docnum>
<subject>Subject: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8599,“An Act Converting the Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital into a Medical Center to be known as the Cagayan Valley Medical Center and Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds Therefor”</subject>
<body>
 

I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND

The Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital (CVRH) was formally established on June 20, 1945 as the Tuguegarao Civilian Hospital with a 25-bed capacity. On November 1945, it was later converted to Cagayan Provincial Hospital with an authorized bed capacity of 200. In July 1963, it was designated as a Regional Training and Teaching Hospital by virtue of Department Order No. 79, series 1963. On April 22, 1980 it was classiﬁed as Tertiary Regional. Hospital per Ministry Order No. 83, series of 1980.  

On May 1, 1985, through 13.0. No. 851, the Regional Health Laboratory and Regional Mental Hospital were integrated with the Tertiary Regional Hospital and became the Integrated Cagayan Regional Hospital. On September 15, 1989, the Integrated Cagayan Regional Hospital was renamed to Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital per RA No. 6782. 

Being the only Level 3 tertiary health care facility in the northeastern Luzon, the catchment area of the Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital includes Region 2 and part of the Cordillera Autonomous Region, such as Apayao and Kalinga. The need for specialized and sub—specialized health care, as well as referrals from government and private level 1 and 2 facilities have continually increased with corresponding bed occupancy rate increasing to its current 110% which is beyond the ideal bed occupancy rate limit of 85%. Related to this is the need to fully implement the law increasing the bed capacity of CVRH from its current 350 beds to 500 beds and appropriating funds therefor. 

Hence, there is a need to fully implement Republic Act No. 8599, “An Act Converting the Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital. into a Medical Center to be known as the Cagayan Valley Medical Center and Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds Therefor” which was enacted on March 20, 1998. To date, the CVRH has been renamed as the Cagayan Valley Medical Center (CVMC). 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations for the implementation of Republic Act No. 8599 “An Act Converting the Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital into a Medical Center to be known as the Cagayan Valley Medical Center and Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds Therefor” with an increase in the bed capacity to 500 and the appropriation of amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act. 

III. SCOPE 

The Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall pertain only to the provisions of RA No. 8599. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. Act —— refers to Republic Act 8599, “An Act Converting the Cagayan Valley Regional Hospital into a Medical Center to be known as the Cagayan Valley Medical Center and Authorizing the Appropriation of Funds Therefor” 

2. AO No.2012-0012 — refers to “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines”, dated July 18, 2012. 

3. Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds offered by the hospital for inpatient care. 

4. CVMC — refers to Cagayan Valley Medical Center 5. [RR —- refers to the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act 

6. Level 3 —— refers to the DOH Classiﬁcation of CVMC as deﬁned by AO 2012—0012. 

V. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The CVMC shall provide tertiary level of promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative health care services, training and research. It shall be fully equipped with state—of-the-art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 3 health care facility. [(9] [777/ 


Furthermore, the CVMC shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital, complementing the services of local government health care facilities in the province and the region. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the Development Plan of CVMC. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of the implementation of the Act, following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

By 2016, CVMC shall fully operate as a 500-bed level III tertiary, teaching & training medical center with additional services on family medicine, pulmonary unit, emergency department, oncology with linear accelerator, minimally invasive surgery, neonatology, magnetic resonance imaging unit, immunopathology, endocrinology, ophthalmology, and reconstructive and plastic surgery. Structural reorganization taking into consideration these additional services shall be established based on the approved hospital development plan of CVMC consistent with the DOH standards. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The CVMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resources. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource complement, re-classify and /or upgrade positions, promote professional development and hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards and other accrediting institutions and professional groups. 

The CVMC shall increase its health personnel based on recommended stafﬁng pattern for a 500-bed capacity hospital following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-1, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All records of assets, movable and immovable of CVMC as well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and shall be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The CVMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH standards of a general Level 3 hospital as provided for under DOH AO 2012-0012. Additional equipment that will complement the expansion of services shall be made available. 

5. Infrastructure 

The CVMC shall implement construction, repair and renovation of existing physical infrastructures to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. Additional infrastructure and facilities will be responsive to need for health care and planned expansion of services. 

6. Systems Development 

The CVMC shall develop and sustain standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP) to be able to submit reports on cases of chronic non-communicable diseases, injuries, violence, disabilities and other data in compliance to the national DOH data reporting requirements. 

7. Quality Management 

The CVMC shall implement quality management system in conformity with ISO 9001: 2008 certiﬁcation which the hospital aims to acquire by 2015. The CVMC shall enhance and improve Continuing Quality Improvement (CQI) programs. It will strengthen Patient Safety policies and standards provided by the DOH and the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth). The CVMC shall provide quality health care and maintain other health standards based on clinical practice guidelines of professional or specialty societies and international health organizations which are not contrary to existing local and national standards. The CVMC shall continually develop and further strengthen its hospital resource management capability. 

VI. Implementing Structure 

1. Administrative Control 

The highest ranking designated DOH ofﬁcial or Head of the Ofﬁce for Health Operations shall have an oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations. DOH Regional Ofﬁce No. II shall monitor the implementation of RA No. 8599 guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Medical Center Chief II of CVMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation. of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce through the Regional Ofﬁce No. II. 

2. Source of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No.8599 shall be sourced out accordingly. 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital revenues, Philhealth reimbursements, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2. The additional maintenance and other operating expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the hospital income, PhilHealth reimbursements, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme. 

3. Personnel Services to carry out the full implementation of the Act shall be sourced from the GAA and other sources. 

4. Release of funds shall be approved by the designated appropriate authority. 

VII. Repealing ISeparability- Clause 

Provisions of previous issuances that are incOnsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or a newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
 
