Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>09/15/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 040 </docnum>
<subject>Department of Health OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY SEP 1 5 21115 ' ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER No. 2015 {2040 SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act 8412 “An Act Copverting the Maraosgtubig District Hospital “in Margosatubig, Zamboanga del Sur, into a Regional Hospital, to be Known as the Margosatubig Regional Hospital and to Increase the Bed Capacity to Three Hundred (300) Beds. and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” </subject>
<body>



I. Rationale / Background 

The Margosatubig Regional Hospital (MRH) was established and started as a small operating rural health unit in 1924. The hospital is ideally located on a hill overlooking the Poblacion of Margosatubig and Dumanquillas Bay and sitting on a 27 hectare—lot property The initial building was constructed thru voluntary contributions in the form of cash, labor and materials by the residents in the said town. 

In 1948, the hospital was nationalized with an authorized bed capacity of 25 and operated as a District Hospital with Secondary capability. Operating as a hospital for almost 90 years, it is serving the eight (8) upland/mainland municipalities and four (4) coastal and island municipalities of the province of Zamboanga del 8111' as its primary catchment areas and the neighboring municipalities of ZambOanga del Norte and Zamboanga Sibugay. In 1992, RA No. 7207 was approved increasing the bed capacity of Margosatubig District Hospital (MDH) to 50 beds. Subsequently, in 1997, RA No. 8412 was approved converting the MDH into a regional hospital to be known as Margosatubig Regional Hospital (MRH) and increased its bed capacity to three hundred (300). 

Due to the absence of the required Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), the law was not implemented. Through the years the hospital had undergone limited renovation and repair of facilities. With the Health Facilities Enhancement Program (HF EP), the facilities of MRH were eventually upgraded to address the health needs of the people in the Region. 

Currently, the MRH is licensed as Level 1 based on A0 No. 2012-0012 dated July 18, 2012 and Philhealth accredited. It serves as the primary core-referral hospital of the Dumanquillas Alliance Inter—Local Health Zone (DA—ILHZ) which is composed of eight (8) municipalities of Zamboanga del. Sur. The accessibility and strategic location of the hospital which can be reached by both land and sea means of transportation, patients coming from the nearby municipalities of the above mentioned municipalities of Zamboanga provinces seek emergency treatment and medical services/hospitalization of MRH. However, the patients with cases needing higher level of care, MRH refer patients to Pagadian City giving considerations to patient’s choice and other higher level private hospitals. 

The increase in bed capacity and upgrading to tertiary care capability, MRH would deﬁnitely serve as end referral hospital in the region. 

II. Objective 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA. No. 8412, “An Act Converting tlze Margosatubtg District Hospital in Margosatubig, Zamboanga del 8217' into a Regional Hospital, to be known as the Margosatabtg Regional Hospital and to Increase the Bed Capacity to Three Hundred (300) Beds, And Appropriating Funds Therefor. ” 

III. Scope 

The Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall only pertain to Republic Act No. 8412. 

IV. Definition of Terms/Acronyms 

1. Act - refers here to Republic Act No. 8412, “An Act Converting the Margosatubig District Hospital in Margosatubig, Zamboanga del Sat into a Regional Hospital, to be known as the Margosatubtg Regional Hospital and to Increase the Bed Capacity to Three Hundred (300) Beds, and Appropriating F ands Therefor” 

2. AO No. 2012-0012 — refers to the Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and other Health Facilities in the Philippines dated 18 July 2012. 

3. Bed Capacity — pertains to the number of hospital beds made available for Inpatient care authorized by law. 

4. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) - is the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a ' given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period. 

5. Level 1 —— refers to the DOH classification of MRH as defined by AO No. 2012- 0012 dated July 18, 2012. 

6. MRH — acronym refers to Margosatubig Regional Hospital 

7. Referral Hospital — refers to a health care institution capable of accepting referrals from lower level hospitals and render general and specialized health care services. 

8. Regional Hospital — refers to the health facility designated as Regional Hospital to serve as referral hospital of the catchment areas within the region. 

V. Policies and Guidelines 

A. General Policy 

The MRH shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital, complementing the services of higher level local government health care facilities in the province and the region. It shall provide secondary to tertiary level of promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative health care services and research. It shall be fully equipped with the state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a DOH licensed level 1 and Philhealth accredited health care facility. It shall eventually aim to upgrade to Level 2 and Level 3 by phase development to comply with the DOH Administrative Order No. 2012-0012, Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classification of Hospitals and other Health Care Facilities in the Philippines. 

B. Implementing Guidelines 

In support of the upgrading of the hospital, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 
By the end of 2015, the MRH shall operate a 200 bed Level 2 Regional Hospital compliant to the safety and other DOH regulations and standards for a secondary with basic and specialized areas in Medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Surgery. It shall provide physical and rehabilitation unit, ambulatory surgical clinic, dialysis facility and blood bank. Furthermore, the MRH shall fully implement the 300 beds and upgrade its capability to Level 3 upon recommendation of the Regional Ofﬁce No. IX. 

2. Health Human Resources 
The MRH shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure, rights of its health human resource complement, upgrade their positions and hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards as per DEM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013—01, “Revised Standards on Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals CY 2013 Edition” dated September 23, 2013. 

3. Equipment 
The MRH shall make an inventory of all existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH standards appropriate for a Level 2 general hospital as provided for under DOH A0 No. 2012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of the DOH. 

4. Infrastructure 
The MRH shall implement and seek the support of DOH for the construction, repair or renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and DOH standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others.  

5. Systems Development 
The MRH shall develop and implement standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming with the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

6. Quality Management The MRH shall implement the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards. The MRH shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement (CQI) programs, Patient Safety, policies and standards provided by DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Philhealth) and other health standards provided by international health organization which is supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. Implementing Structure 

1. Administrative Control The highest ranking designated DOH official or Head of the Ofﬁce for Health Operations shall have an oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations. The DOH Regional Office No. 1X shall monitor the implementation of Republic Act No. 8412 guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Chief of Hospital of MRH shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, financial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce through the DOH Regional. Office No. IX. 

2. Source of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 8412 shall be sourced out accordingly. 

2.1 Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes Philhealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to the prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2.2 The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MODE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital revenue, Philhealth payments, public—private partnership and or other modes of ﬁnancing scheme. 

2.3 Personnel Services (PS) to carry out the full implementation of the approved stafﬁng pattern of a 300-bed capacity hospital shall be implemented in compliance to DEM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

2.4 Release of funds shall be approved by the appropriate authority. 

VII. Repealing lSeparability Clause Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. ' 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 


</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


