Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>05/12/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0022 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rulesand Regulations of Republic Act No. 9240 “An Act Converting the Las Piﬁas District Hospital in Las Piijas Citv, Metro Manila, into a Medical Center. to be Known as the Las Pifias General Hosgital & Satellite Trauma Center and Appropriating Funds Therefor” </subject>
<body>

I. RATIONALE / BACKGROUND 

The Las Piﬁas General Hospital & Satellite Trauma Center LPGH & STC), formerly called the Las Piﬁas Emergency Hospital was established‘ 977 as an out- patient clinic located in front of the famous Las Piﬁas Bamboo Organ Church. It has been the only national government hospital in south Metro Manila. In 1984, the hospital . was renamed as Las Piﬁas District Hospital (LPDH) and was integratedwith the District Health Ofﬁce IV under the National Capital Region, Department of Health (DOH), per Executive Order No. 119 of 1987. I 

On May 22, 1992, upon the approval of Republic Act No. 7539, the bed capacity of the hospital was increased from 25 to 50 beds. Through a series of Department Orders (DOH ' DO No. 456, s. 1994, and amended by DO No. l27—A, s. 1995), the DOH upgraded LPDH from a district hospital to a general hospital. 

The LPDH was transferred to its new location in December 1997." It is now situated south of the National Capital Region, speciﬁcally at P. Diego Cera St., Bernabe Compound, Barangay Pulang Lupa 1, Las Piﬁas City, serving the Muntiparlaspa cities (Muntinlupa, Paraﬁaque, Las Piﬁas and Pasay) and the Cities of Bacoor and Imus and the neighboring towns of Cavite. In February 1999, LPDH was chosen as the pilot and lead hospital fOr the implementation of public health services in the hospital, under the , Integrated District Health System of the Department of Health-National Capital Region. 

By Virtue of the Republic Act No. 9240 approved on February 10, 2004, the LPDH converted into a medical center and renamed as Las Piﬁas General Hospital and Satellite Trauma Center with an increase in bed capacity from 50 to 200. The recently completed hospital site development is geared towards achieving the mandate for a ' 200-bed capacity. Also, the hospital is actively working for the accreditation of its Residency Training Program in the four (4) major departments namely, Internal Medicine, General Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynecology and Pediatrics. The LPGH&STC 1s in the process of achieving a certiﬁcation of ISO 9001. 2008 by the 1St Quarter of 201 5. '

Through the implementation of RA No. 9240, the LPGH-&STC shall address the much needed trauma services and continuing quality services. 

 

 


II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations to fast track the hospital’s institutional development in compliance with the RA No. 9240, “An Act Converting the Las Piﬁas District Hospital in Las Piﬁas City, Metro Manila, into a Medical Center, to be Known as the Las Piﬁas General Hospital & Satellite Trauma Center, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”. 

III. SCOPE 

The Rules and regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall pertain only for the provisions of RA. No. 9240. 

DEFINITION OF TERMSIACRONYMS 

1. AO No. 2012-0012 —— refers to the “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation. of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines, “ dated July 18, 2012 

2. Bed Capacity _. refers to the number of beds offered by the hospital for inpatient care. 

3. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) — refers to the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period; the idea or recommended BOR is 85%. " 

4. IHOMP — refers to the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program 

5. Departmentalization - refers to the re-organizaticn of the present medical and nursing stafﬁng into different specialized and functional components of departments for Level 3 health care 

6. Emergency - refers to a condition that requires immediate intervention of which failure to do so will cause loss of life or limb 

7. General Hospital - refers to health facility providing services for all types of deformity, disease, illness or injury 

8. Hospital Capability - refers to the level of care the hospital can provide per AO No. - 2012-0012. 

9. Hospital Capacity -— refers to the number of hospital beds 

10. LPGH & STC - refers to Las Piﬁas General Hospital and Satellite Trauma Center 

11. RA. No. 9240 - “An Act Converting the Las Piﬁas District Hospital in Las Pifias City, Metro Manila, Into a Medical Center, to be Known as the Las Piﬁas General Hospital & Satellite Trauma Center and Appropriating Funds Therefor” 

V. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The LPGH & STC, as a general hospital and trauma center, shall provide tertiary level of promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative health care services with training and research capabilities. It shall be fully equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 3 health care facility. 


Furthermore, the LPGH & STC" shall strengthen its existing services and aim for ' the improvement of its service” capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the updated Development Plan of LPGH & STC and intents of RA. No. 9240. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of the implementation of R.A. No. 9240, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

In response to the health needs and priorities of its catchment areas, the LPGH & STC shall be licensed and accredited as a Level 3 General Hospital, fully implementing the ZOO-bed capacity. It shall offer subspecialty services on Orthopaedics, Urology, Colorectal Surgery, Minimal Invasive Surgery, Neurosurgery, Thoracic and Cardio Vascular Surgery, Reconstructive Surgery, Gastroenterology, Puhnonology, Cardiology, Endocrinology, Neonatology, Perinatology, Oncology, Rehabilitation Medicine and Trauma Services, among others, by the end of CY 2015. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The LPGH & STC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource, re-classify or and for upgrade positions, promote professional development and hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards. 

The LPGH & STC shall increase its health personnel based on recommended stafﬁng pattern for a Level 3 bed capacity (200 beds) hospital following the DBMﬁDOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern of Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All assets, movable and immovable, and records of the LPGH & ST C as well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and shall be recorded and accounted for in accordance with generally accepted accounting, auditing rules and regulations. 

4. Equipment 

_ The LPGH & STC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH minimum standards appropriate for a Level 3 general hospital as provided for under DOH AO No. 2012-0012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the assistance of DOH. 

5. Infrastructure 

The LPGH & STC shall implement and seek the suppert of the DOH Central for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The LPGH & STC shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system, conforming to the basic requirements of Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The LPGH & STC shall implement the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Philhealth), other DOH health standards and international health organizations standards which are supportive of existing local and national standards- 

VI. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control 

The highest ranking designated DOH ofﬁcial or Head of the Office for Health Operations shall have oversight jurisdiction over hospital operations, DOH Regional Ofﬁce-NCR shall monitor the implementation of the RA No. 9240 and may recommend further upgrading guided by this Administrative Order. ' 

The Medical Center Chief of LPGH & STC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall continuously submit developmental plans, financial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce. 

B. Source of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of RA No. 9240 shall be sourced out accordingly. 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income, which includes Philhealth payments, and other mode of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 


2. The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital conversion and expansion shall be sourced from GAA, hospital income, . Philhealth payments, Public-Private Partnership and / or other sources. 

3. Personnel Services to Carry out the full implementation of the hospital stafﬁng pattern of 100 beds for general health care and 100' beds for the. custodial care'shall be sourced from the GAA as provided by DOH- DBM Joint Circular 2013- 01 dated September 23,2013 and other 1ssuances. - 

4. Release of funds from- DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority upon recommendation of the Cluster Head, Ofﬁce for Technical Services. 

VII REPEALING/ SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly.

If any provision of this Order declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 
 

