Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>03/27/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0012 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8549., “An Act Upgrading the SeventvéFive (75) Bed Capacity Puerto Princesa Provincial Hospital in the City of Puerto Princesa. Province of Palawan Into a Tertiary Level Hospital Increasing the Capacity to One Hundred Fifty (150) Bed which shall be Known as the Ospital ng Palawan, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” </subject>
<body>


I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The Ospital ng Palawan (ONP), formerly known as Puerto Princesa Hospital, came into existence as a 20 bed hospital in 1901 through the initiative of Willsey Minik, the military governor of the Philippines. In 1904, hospital administration and maintenance was taken over by the Provincial Government. The administrative control of the hospital was transferred to the Bureau of Hospitals (precursor of the health department) in 1938. It was only in 1980 that the hospital was increased to 50 bed capacity to serve the health needs of the growing population. 

By virtue of Republic act No. 7413 in 1992, the hospital was upgraded to a 75— -bed capacity general hospital, and upon the implementation of the Local Government Code was devolved to the Provincial Government of Palawan. 

In 1998, RA No. 8549 was enacted into law, upgrading the Puerto Princesa  Hospital into ISO-bed tertiary hospital, renaming it as “Ospital ng Palawan” and transferring back to the National Government. However, the actual transfer to the Department of Health took effect on January 1, 2004 and full upgrading has not been implemented due to budgetary constraints. 

The hospital caters to the people of Palawan with Puerto Princesa City as its primary catchment area and the nearby 23 mainland and island municipalities of the . Province of Palawan as its secondary catchment area. 

For the past six years, the average bed occupancy rate (BOR) of ONP averaged 172% which is way beyond standard of 85%. During the same period, more than 90% of its inpatients were classiﬁed as Class C and D (AO 51 -A Series of 2001). 

Department Order No. 2011—0188, “Kalusugan Pangkalahatan Execution Plan and , Implementation Arrangements”, mandates the provision of universal health coverage. The ONP shall address the health needs of its clientele by increasing the number of its health human resource complement, upgrading capabilities in terms of expertise and improving its infrastructure and equipment in order to accommodate more patients. 

The implementation of RA No. 8549 shall effectively provide quality health care to its patients, in consonance with the policy of the state “to protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness among them. (Philippine Constitution, Article II, Section 15). I 

II. OBJECTIVE 

The Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations to fast- track institutional development of ONP in compliance with the policy implementation requirements of RA No. 8549, “An Act Upgrading the Seventy-Five (75)-Bed Capacity Puerto Princesa Provincial Hospital in the City of Puerto Princesa, Province of Palawan into a Tertiary Level Hospital, Increasing the Capacity to One Hundred Fifty (150)-Bed, which shall be known as the Ospital ng Palawan, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

III. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYM 

1. Act — refers to RA No. 8549 “An Act Upgrading the Seventy-Five (75)—Bed Capacity Puerto Princesa Provincial Hospital in the City of Puerto Princesa, Province of Palawan into a Tertiary Level Hospital, Increasing the Capacity to One Hundred Fifty (150)-Bed, which shall be known as the Ospital ng Palawan, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

2. AD No. 2012-0012 refers to the “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines” dated 18 July 2012 

3. Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds offered by the hospital for inpatient care 

4. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) — refers to the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a given period to declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period 

5. General Hospital — refers to the classiﬁcation of hospitals defined by AD No. 2012-0012 

6. IRR — refers to the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA No. 8549 

7. ONP — refers to Ospital ng Palawan 

8. Level 2 Hospital — refers to the DOH Classiﬁcation of ONP as defined by AO No. 2012-0012 

9. Referral Hospital — refers to a health care institution capable of accepting referrals from other health facilities 

10. Region IV-B — refers to Southern Luzon Region covering the Provinces of Mindoro, Marinduque, Romblon and Palawan. 


IV. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The ONP shall provide tertiary level of curative, promotive, preventive, rehabilitative health care services and research. It shall be fully equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 2 health care facility. 

The ONP shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital, complementing the services of the local government health care facilities in the province and the region. The increase in bed-capacity shall be consistent With the updated Development Plan of ONP. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of the implementation of RA No. 8549, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

The ONP shall fully operate as a ISO-bed General Hospital with _ tertiary capability. Structural reorganization 'with additional services shall be established based on 

the Hospital Development Plan. The increase in bed capacity and commensurate services provided by the Act shall be achieved by CY 2016. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The ONP shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource. The hospital shall evaluate its existing health human resource complement, re—classify and/or upgrade positions, promote professional development and hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards. 

The ONP shall increase its health personnel based on recommended staffing pattern for a 150 bed capacity hospital following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013- 01, “Revised Standards on Organizational StructUre and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals, CY 2013 Edition” dated 23 September, 2013. 

3. Equipment 

The ONP shall make an inventory of its existing hospital equipment and undertake to conform to the DOH standards of a general hospital as provided for under 

DOH A.O No. 2012-0012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the eXpansion of services shall be procured with the assistance of DOH. 

4. Infrastructure 

The ONP shall implement and seek the support of DOH for the construction, repair and renovation of physical infrastructure to conform all existing laws and licensing standards, and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with the Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

5. System Development 

The ONP shall develop and sustain standard of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

6. Quality Management 

The ONP shall implement the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards. The ONP shall enhance and improve Continuing Quality Improvement Program, Patient Safety, policies and standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. ' 

V. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control 

The highest DOH designated ofﬁcial for Ofﬁce of Technical Services shall have oversight jurisdiction operations of ONP. The DOH Regional Ofﬁce IV—B shall monitor the implementation of RA No. 8549 and may recommend further upgrading guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Chief of Hospital of ONP shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital Operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce. 

B. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of RA No. .8549 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations.- 


2. The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and/or other sources. 

3. Personal Services (PS) to carry out the full implementation of the stafﬁng pattern of 150 beds shall be implemented in compliance with DOH-DBM Joint Circular 2013—01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

4. Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority upon recommendation of the Ofﬁce of Technical Services. 

VI. REPEALING/SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions of previous issuance that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provisions of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>

 <sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>
