Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>OCT 07, 2016</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2016 - 0036</docnum>


<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Guidelines on the Utilization of the 4% Newborn Screening Fund by the Department of Health-Regional Ofﬁces and ARMM</subject>


<body>
I. Rationale 

To ensure the maximum and appropriate utilization of the Newborn-Screening (NBS) 4% Fund by the Department of Health Regional Ofﬁces (DOH ROS) and DOH Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (DOH-ARMM), the Advisory Committee on Newborn Screening (ACNBS) recommended the review of the NBS 4% Fund utilization and the subsequent release of Administrative Order 2013-0015 on April 16, 2013, which sets the guidelines on its utilization. 

As provided in Section 16 of the Republic Act 9288, the said NBS 4% Fund shall be set aside from the NBS Fees for the DOH — Centers for Health Development (presently referred to as Regional Ofﬁces - ROs) or their future equivalent to be used solely for follow- up services, education and other activities directly related to the provision of newborn screening services. Such provision shall thereby contribute in ensuring the sustainability of the National Comprehensive Newborn Screening System (N CNBSS) and in subsequently reaching the vision of saving all Filipino newborns from mental retardation and death. 

However, almost three years after the review of the fund utilization in 2012 and the release of the AO 2013-0015, gaps were still identiﬁed in the 4% Fund Utilization. Thus, during the meeting of the National Technical Working Group on Newborn Screening held on April 30, 2015, a thorough review of the fund utilization was recommended. The result of the review is embodied in the revision of AO 2013-0015 as outlined in this Administrative Order. 

II. Objective 

To expand the guidelines on the Newborn Screening 4% fund utilization of DOH-ROS and DOH-ARMM and to ensure appropriateness and maximized use for the NCNBSS. 

III. Coverage 

Provisions of this Administrative Order shall apply to all DOH-ROS, DOH-ARMM, Newborn Screening Reference Center (N SRC), Newborn Screening Centers (NSCs) and Newborn Screening Continuity Clinics.

IV. Deﬁnition of Terms 

a. Newborn Screening is an essential public health strategy to detect and manage congenital disorder to prevent mental retardation and death. 

b. RA 9288: Newborn Screening Act of 2004 refers to the act promulgating a comprehensive policy and a national system for ensuring newborn screening. 

c. Department of Health Central Oﬂice is the lead agency in implementing the Republic Act 9288 or the Newborn Screening Act Of 2004. 

d. Department Of Health Regional Oﬁice is the satellite ofﬁces of the Department of Health in every region, where each has a designated Newborn Screening (NBS) Coordinator as the key implementer of newborn screening program at the regional level. 

e. Newborn Screening Continuity Clinics refers to an ambulatory clinic based in a tertiary hospital identiﬁed by the DOH to be part of the NCNBSS. It is equipped to facilitate continuity of care of conﬁrmed patients in its area of coverage. 

f. Newborn Screening Center (NSC) refers to a facilityequipped-with a newborn screeninglaboratory that complies with the standards established by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and provides all required laboratory tests and recall/follow—up programs for newborns with heritable conditions. 

g. Newborn Screening Reference Center (NSRC) refers to the central facility at the National "Institutes of Health (NIH) that deﬁnes testing and follow-up protocols, maintains an external laboratory proﬁciency testing program, oversees the national ' testing database and case registries, assists in training. activities in all aspects of the program, oversees content of educational materials and acts as the Secretariat of the Advisory Committee on Newborn Screening. 

V. Policies and Procedures 

a. General Guidelines 

The earmarked amOunt to DOH-ROs/DOH-ARMM shall be for the purpose of implementing the newborn screening program and facilitating achievement of required outputs. 

The 4% of the NBS Fee shall be set aside for the DOH ROS and DOH-ARMM to be used for follow-up services, education and other activities directly related to the provision of newborn screening services, incentive for RHU collecting health units, ' staff development of NBS personnel, capital outlay needed for NBS program implementation, and cost of repeat samples [Section 22, IRR of RA9288]. 

At least 30% of the total amount requested from the 4% NBS funds and transferred to each region shall be used for its Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE). Excluded from the said MOOE are the salaries and wages of NBS personnel. 

B. Speciﬁc Guidelines 

1. The 4% share of the DOH-ROS and DOH-ARMM shall be used for the following NBS-related activities: 

a) Follow—up service of patients with positive screening result by personnel hired for the NBS unit based at DOH-ROs/DOH- ARMM:

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 

(1) Salaries and wages of Nurse and/or Medical Coordinator on contract of service and designated vehicle driver (if applicable); 
(2) Traveling expenses of monitoring Visits; 
(3) Per diem of monitoring teams; and 
(4) Other related expenses. 

b) Follow—up service of patients conﬁrmed positive by personnel hired for the NBS unit based at Newborn Screening Continuity Clinics. 

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 

(1) Salaries and wages of Nurse/Genetic Counselor and/or Medical Coordinator on contract of service; 
(2) Traveling expenses of monitoring visits/attendance to trainings/conferences; 
(3) Per diem of monitoring team; 
(4) Indigency funds for laboratory tests and long-term management; and 
(5) Other related expenses. 

c) Education and other activities directly related to the provision of NBS services. 

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 

(1) Meetings with municipal/provincial/Newborn Screening Facility Coordinators; 
(2) Venue and food of participants during the conduct of lectures/trainings/orientation seminars; 
(3) Supplies and materials needed for the conduct of lectures/trainings/orientation seminars; 
(4) Honoraria of resource persons/facilitators; 
(5) Traveling expenses and per diem for the conduct of training/orientation seminars; 
(6) Printing and reproduction of advocacy and information materials; and 
(7) - Other training/seminar and campaign related expenses. 

d) Incentives for RHU collecting health units of AT LEAST 2% of the 4% funds of the DOH—ROs/DOH-ARMM. 

Incentive may be in the form of; 

(1) NBS kits; 
(2) Sponsorship to newborn screening - related local meetings and conferences; 
(3) Promotional materials/giveaways; or 
(4) Telecommunication expenses related to newborn screening activities. 

e) Staff development of the personnel of the NBS unit based at the DOH—ROs/DOH-ARMM and Continuity Clinics. 

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 

(1) Registration fees of trainings/seminars/conventions/ ofﬁcial meetings; 
(2) Traveling and accommodation expenses; 
(3) Per diem of staff directly involved in the program; and 
(4) Attendance to international conferences approved by DOH— Screening & Evaluation Committee for Training & Development (SECTD). Approval shall be based on the following: - 

(a) An ofﬁcial country representative involving a highly specialized ﬁeld that is related in the program management or policy development; and 

(b) The conference focus on newborn screening program management and policy development; and 

(c) Paper or poster presenter/s on newborn screening- related services/innovation; or 

(d) Oral presenter/invited resource person representing the country either in plenary or in parallel session. 

Post travel report shall be submitted two weeks after travel. 

f) Capital outlay 

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 

(1) Purchase of Ofﬁce Equipment, Communication Equipment, IT Equipment and Software, Furniture and Fixtures needed in the implementation of the NBS program; 

(2) Purchase of Motor Vehicle for NBS program, which shall abide by the following rules: 

(a) Each RO can acquire one (1) vehicle subject to government procurement process. Request for a second vehicle shall require approval of the Advisory Committee on Newborn Screening (ACNBS); 

(b) The type of vehicle is limited to SUVs/4-wheel drive or its equivalent. The vehicle will have a vehicle wrap using a prescribed DOH—NBS standard design approved by the DOH; 

(c) The motor vehicle shall be for ofﬁcial use only and shall be primarily for monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of NBS program at health facilities, government and private, at all levels, patient recall, advocacy, technical and logistics assistance to Local Government Units (LGUs), Non— governmental organizations (N GOs), Academic Institutions and other stakeholders; monitoring and supervision activities on NBS facilities; for other functions ofﬁcially related to the implementation of the NBS Program; 

(d) The vehicle shall be for ofﬁcial NBS use only; and 

(e) The designation of driver will be dependent on the set up of each region with the objective of ensuring proper usage and maintenance of their vehicle. 

g) Maintenance and operating expenses of the program 

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 
(1) Telephone bills/Call Cards (Landline and mobile phones); 
(2) Ofﬁce Supplies and Other Supplies Expenses; 
(3) Internet Expenses; 
(4) Representation Expenses; 
(5) Repairs and Maintenance of acquired Properties & Equipment; and 
(6) Other Administrative Overhead related expenses. 

h) Cost of repeat samples due to insufﬁcient and contaminated samples of patients in their catchment area. 

2. NBS Nurse Coordinators shall be in-charge of the monitoring of funds transferred to DOH-ROs/DOH-ARMM. 

3. All disbursement of funds shall be subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations. 

4. These guidelines shall be reviewed periodically by the Family Health Ofﬁce of the Department of Health (F HO-DOH) for technical processes and Newborn Screening Reference Center for the usage of fund. 

C. Roles and Responsibilities 

1. DOH ROS/DOH-ARMM shall: 

a) Maintain a Trust Fund account for the 4% earmarked amount; 

b) Take charge of the overall management and disbursement of the transferred fund; 

c) Submit the following approved documents, namely: (1) Internal Operating Budget (IOB) for the calendar year, (2) Work and Financial Plan (WFP), (3) Accomplishment report, and (4) any supplemental plans to DOH-Disease and Prevention Control Bureau. 

d) Prepare and submit to NSRC the request letter for fund transfer along with the original copy of approved documents, namely: (1) Fund utilization report (FUR) veriﬁed by Resident COA; (2) Internal Operating Budget (IOB) for the calendar year; (3) Work and Financial Plan (WFP); (4) Accomplishment report and (5) supplemental plans (if any); and 

e) Utilize the unexpended balance of the 4% funds from the previous year/s for the NBS activities of the following year. 

2. NSRC shall: 

a) Review fund transfer request based on the approved and submitted FUR, IOB, WF P and Accomplishment Report. Findings shall be elevated to the DOH-FHO; 

b) Request funding and payment approval from UP Manila of the funds for transfer to DOH-ROs/DOH-ARMM; and _ 

c) Transfer earmarked funds to DOH—ROS and DOH—ARMM within 45 working days from date of receipt of requests. 

D. Procedural Guidelines 

1. A Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) shall be executed between NSRC, NSCs and DOH—ROs/DOH-ARMM on the collection and transfer of 4% of NBS fees; 

2. NSRC shall collect from NSCs the percentage of the NBS fees for DOH- ROS/DOH-ARMM; 

3. NSRC shall notify the DOH-ROs/DOH-ARMM on the availability of 4% of NBS fees; 

4. DOH-ROs/DOH-ARMM shall request from NSRC the amount for transfer as indicated in the DOH—ROs/DOH-ARMM Annual Internal Operating Budget (IOB); 

5. NSRC shall transfer earmarked funds to the DOH—ROS/DOH-ARMM; and 

6. DOH Central ofﬁce shall facilitate monitoring and evaluation of fund utilization of and fund requests from DOH—ROs/DOH-ARMM, in coordination with NSRC. Assessment shall be reported and resolutions to critical issues shall be discussed by the DOH Central Ofﬁce with the 

VI. Repealing Clause 

AO No. 2013-0015 and all other Orders whose provisions are inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed/modiﬁed. 

VI. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after its approval and publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>

<sign>PAULYN JEAN B. ROSELL-UBIAL, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
