Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>May 16, 2016</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2016 - 0013</docnum>


<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10678 “An Act Converting the Davao Regional Hospital into Davao Regional Medical Center, Increasing its Bed Capacity and Appropriating funds Therefor, Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7179”</subject>


<body>
I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE 

The Davao Regional Medical. Center (DRMC), formerly Davao Regional- Hospital (DRH), is a government tertiary training hospital that was established in 1972 as a 50-bed provincial hospital of the Province of Davao. In 1980, the DRH was reclassiﬁed from provincial hospital to a regional hospital level with a IOU-bed capacity through Administrative Order No. 83 series of 1980. On January 14, 1992, Republic Act No. 7179, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Davao Regional Hospital in the Municipality of T agurn, Province of Davao from 150 to 200 beds and Appropriating Funds Therefore” was signed into law. Since August 1, 2001 the DRH was issued a license to operate as 200-bed hospital. 

The catchment areas of DRH are the provinces of Compostela Valley, Davao del Norte, Davao del Sur and Davao Oriental. However, neighboring municipalities of Surigao del Sur, Agusan del Norte and Agusan del Sur of Region XIII, in addition to the patients from the other provinces of Region X, exceeded the utilization rate of DRH. To address the hospitalization need of its primary and secondary catchment population, the DRH has to implement 630 -~ 700 bed capacity which compromised the quality of services of the hospital. The average occupancy rate in the last three years (2013, 2014 and 2015) is 240.48%. 

On August 26, 2015, Republic Act No. 10678 “An Act Converting the Davao Regional Hospital into Davao Regional Medical Center, Increasing its Bed Capacity and Appropriating Funds Therefor, Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7179” was approved. As Davao Regional Medical Center continues to grow in response to the need for services of the people, DRMC also holds the distinction of being the Cancer Center for Mindanao with accredited Surgical Oncology Fellowship training program, and the only accredited Kidney Transplant Program in Mindanao. 

Thus, implementing RA 10678 is the viable solution to address the hospital’s persistent capacity problem and shall greatly boost Mindanao’s health sector development. Also, the hospital’s conversion into a medical training center shall provide opportunities for availment of affordable medical internship for local medic students and further improve the quality of basic health services. \3{ 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA 10678 dated August 26, 2015, otherwise known as “An Act Converting the Davao Regional Hospital into Davao Regional Medical Center, Increasing its Bed Capacity and Appropriating Funds Therefor, Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7179”. 

III. SCOPE 

The Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall only pertain to RA 10678. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. A0 2012-0012 - refers to the Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines dated 18 July 2012. 

2. A0 2012-0012-A - refers to the Amendments to Department of Health A0 2012-0012 dated September 3, 2015. 

3. Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds made available for inpatient care. 

4. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) — is the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period. 

5. DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01 -~ refers to the “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern for Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013, by the Department of Budget Management and Department of Health. 

6. DRH — Davao Regional Hospital. 

7. DRMC — Davao Regional Medical Center. 

8. Level 3 Hospital - as classified in Administrative Order No. 2012—0012-A dated September 3, 2015. 

9. Medical Center -—« refers to a hospital staffed and equipped to care for many patients and a large number of kinds of diseases and dysfunctions using modern technology. 

10. RA 10678 - “An Act Converting the Davao Regional Hospital into Davao Regional Medical Center, Increasing its Bed Capacity and Appropriating Funds Therefor, Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7179”. 

11. Referral Hospital -- refers to a health care institution capable of accepting referrals from lower level hospitals and rendered general and specialized health care services. ' 

V. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The DRMC shall provide a tertiary level of care and research, while maintaining the promotive and preventive health care services. It shall be fully equipped with state—of—the-art facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 3 health care facility. 

Furthermore, the DRMC shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital of Davao Region and the rest of the regions in Mindanao, complementing the services of local government health care - facilities. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the HOSpital Development Plan of DRMC. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support to the mandate of RA 10678, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

The DRMC shall operate as a 600—bed Level 3 general hospital with additional specialty services such as Nephrology Center; Neurological services with Acute Stroke Unit and Neurological Training Program; One- Stop Shop Cancer Center services that includes nuclear medicine, ”diagnostic, therapeutic and rehabilitative care both iii-patient and . outpatient; Palliative and Hospice Care Center; Minimal Access Surgery; Advance Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Center; Clinical Specialty and Subspecialty Training Programs; Health Human Resource Training Center; HIV/AIDS Treatment Center, and will continually strive to improve its quality service. 

Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established based on the Hospital DeveIOpment Plan. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The DRMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource complement, re—classify and/or propose upgrading positions, promote professional development and shall hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards pursuant to the purpose and intent of RA No. 10678. 

The DRMC shall implement the maximum staffing standards following the DEM-DOH. Joint Circular No. 2013-01, including provisions in its future amendments/ revisions on standards for hospital with bed capacity exceeding 500. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All movable and immovable assets, liabilities and obligations as well as records of the DRMC shall be properly updated and shall. be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The DRMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH minimum standards of a Level 3 hospital as provided for under DOH A0 No. 2012-0012-A and. other regulatory agencies. Additional equipments and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of DOH until the hospital attains its mandated status. 

5. Infrastructure 

The DRMC shall implement and seek the support of DOH for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The DRMC shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The DRMC shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program (CQIP), Patient Safety, DOH policies and regulations, standards of hospital operations prescribed in the DOH-Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB) manuals, Health Facilities and Services Regulatory Bureau (HFSRB), Food and Drugs Authority (FDA), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health organization standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

1. Administrative Control 

The Medical Center Chief of DRMC shall be accountable and responsible for the operation and management relative to the increase in bed capacity, upgrading of service capability and the implementation of all other provisions of RA 1067 8. 

The DOH, through the Regional Ofﬁce XI shall have oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations. It shall monitor the implementation of this Administrative Order. 

Further, the Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB) shall provide the needed technical assistance in line with hospital upgrading, development and capacity building. 

2. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 10678 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

2.1 Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2.2 The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and/or other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2.3 Personnel Services (PS) shall be appropriated and sourced from the GAA to cany out the full implementation of the standard stafﬁng pattern appropriate for 600-bed hospital. 

2.4 Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority. 

VII. REPEALING / SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. 

Any previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of lawr or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, MD, MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>