Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>OCT 10, 2016</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2016 - 0037</docnum>


<subject>Subject: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10865 “An Act Converting the Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro - Sr. Regional Training and Teaching Hospital in the Province of Misamis Occidental into a Medical Center to be Known as the Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Medical Center”</subject>


<body>
I. Rationale/Background 

On June 19, 1965, Republic Act (R.A.) No. 4225 was approved mandating the creation of Ozamiz City National Emergency Hospital. The hospital became .fully operational in 1971. On April 13, 1984, the hospital was renamed as Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. General Hospital by Virtue of Batas Pambansa Blg.- 777. The bed capacity. was increased from 100 to 150 beds through the approval of RA. No. 7197 on February 25, 1992. With the implementation cf RA. No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of .1991, the hospital" Was devolved to the local - government of the province of Misamis Occidental in 1992. I 

The hospital was renationalized and converted into a regional training and teaching hospital of Region X, changing its name to Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro, Sr. Regional Training and Teaching Hospital (MHARSRTTH) by 'virtue of RA. No. 7937 that was approved on March 1, 1995. Consequently, MHARSRTTH was upgraded to a 150 bed capacity tertiary hospital with signiﬁcant increase in health human resource complement. - 

With the implementation of the ﬁve (5) major departments of the. hospital which are the Medicine, Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Family Medicine and Surgery departments together with Radiology, Pathology and sub-specialties in Orthopedics, 'Neurology, Nephrology, Neurosurgery, Urology, Anesthesiology, _ .OphthalmOlogy, Otorhinolaryngology, Gastroenterology and Psychiatry, the existing one hundred ﬁfty bed (150) capacity is inadequate for the hospitalization needs of the catchment population. The accessibility of MHARSRTTH to the neighboring ' municipalities and cities of the provinces of Region X such as Misamis Occidental, -_ Lanao del Norte, the neighboring municipalities of the provinces of Zamboanga del Sur, Zamboanga Sibugay and Zamboanga del Norte of Region IX and Lanao del Sur of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) makes the hospital as the _' ' referral health care facility of patients needing tertiary care. Thus, adding to the . inﬂux of patients. - 

The average bed occupancy rate of 237.33% in-the last three (3) years (2013—2015) is beyond the DOH ideal rate of 80%-85%. Hence, MHARSRTTH could not . Satisfy the hospitalization needs of the catchment populatiOn. On June 23, 201,- R.A. No. 10865, “An Act Converting the Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Regional Training and Teaching Hospital in the Province of Misamis Occidental into a Medical Center to be Known as Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Medical Center” was approved. In this light, these Implenting Rules and Regulations are being promulgated in consultation with the Department of Budget and Management as provided for under Section 13 of the Act. 

II. Objectives  

This AdminiStrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations of R. A. No. 10865, “An Act Converting the Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Regional Training and Teaching Hospital in the Province of Misamis Occidental into a ' Medical Center to be Known as Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Medical Center”. 

A. Objectives of MHARSMC 

a. To provide the Filipino people, particularly in the province of Misamis - Occidental, and in the provinces of Region X and neighboring municipalities of the adjacent Region IX and the AutnOmOus Region of Muslim Mindanao - (ARMM) with more ' affordable, quality and timely hospital care through a- more efﬁcient health service delivery system that prioritizes the needs of the underprivileged, sick, elderly, physically and mentally disabled, women and . children, and when resources are available,- provide free medical. care to ' indigent citizens; 

b. To develop the MHARSMC into a world class tertiary health care provider that utilizes modern and advanced mediCal technologies that caters to specialized cases;  

c. To promote, encourage and engage in scientiﬁc research 1n the prevention of diseases and the care and treatment of patients and related activities, including scholarship and conduct of relevant congresses, conventions, seminars, and conferences, - 

d. To encourage and undertake the training of physicians, nurses medical _ technicians, health Ofﬁcers, social workers, and other health professionals on ' the practical and scientiﬁc conduct and implementation 0f health and medical services, and related activities; and ' 

e. To extend other medical services pursuant to the goals, objectives and rules of ' the National Health Insurance Program (NHIP) 

III. Scope 

The rules and regulations discussed 1n this Administrative Order shall pertain Only to R A. No. 10865.

IV. Deﬁnition of Terms / Acronyms 

1. ”Act -— refers here to RA. No. 10865, “An Act Converting the Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Regional Training and Teaching Hospital in the Province of Misamis Occidental into a Medical Center to be Known as Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. MediCal Cente1”. . 

2." AO 2012- 0012- refers to the “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and other Health Facilities 1n the Philippines” dated - 18 July 2012. . 

3. AO 2012- 0012-A— refers to “Amendment to Administrative Order (A.).) No. 2012- 0012 entitled Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and other Health Facilities in the Philippines” dated 3 September 2015. 

4. Bed Occupancy Rate- is the ratio of the actual inpatient serviCe days for a . given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period. 

5. Level 3 Hospital- as classiﬁed 1n Administrative Order No. 2012-0012- A dated September 3, 2015 ' 

6. Medi¢al Center — a hospital, one especially staffed and equipped to care for ' -. .' ' many patients and for a large number of kinds of diseases and dysfunctions, ' including specialized cases, using sophisticated technology as deﬁned in A0 2016— 0027.

7. MHARSMC- refers to Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Medical Center, the new ' name of Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro _.Sr Regional Training and Teaching Hospital. 

8. Regional Hospital — refers to a higher level tertiary referral hospital with - teaching, training and research functions. It shall have specialty and sub- specialty services in the four (4) major departments and provide basic diagnostic and ancillary procedures as deﬁned in A0 2016-0027

V. Policies and Guidelines 

A. General Policies 

The Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Medical Center (MHARSMC) shall provide a promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative health care services, training and research. It shall enhance the knowledge and 'skills cf its health _ human resources through adequate and relevant trainings and shall be fully - 7 equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities appropriate” for a licensed Level 3 medical center. It shall provide a more ”efﬁcient health service, delivery system prioritizing the needs of the underprivileged, sick, elderly, persons with disability, women and children. 

Furthermore, the MHARSMC shall strengthen its existing services and _ aim for the improvement of its service capability 'whilecontinually serving as a tertiary referral hospital, complementing the services of local government health care facilities in the province and the region. It shall operate to attend . special cases such as—but not limited to cardiOIOgy,kidney, and cancer cases. Pursuant to the Local Government "Code of 1991, providing for one (1) medical center and one (1) regional hospital. per region under the Department of Health (DOH), MHARSMC shall remain as the designated regional- hospital for Region X. The hospital development plan of MHARSMC shall be in accordance with the 500-bed capacity as provided for by R. A. 10865. Effective FY 2017, the hospital shall operate with a 300- bed capacity, and the 500- bed capacity shall be fully implemented by FY 2018. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In Support Of the implementatiOn of RA. No. 10865, the following "guidelines shall be implemented:  

1. Expansion Services 

The MHARSMC shall be an operational 500-bed capacity. . -medical center Within a periodof not more than three (3) years from T the approval of the Act, effective under the following timetable: a) 300 . beds by FY 2017; b) 500 beds by FY 2018. It shall continue to improve its capability to satisfy the licensing requirement for a Level 3 _ hospital as deﬁned in A0 2012-0012-A such as expansion of Intensive Care Unit, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Unit, Tertiary Lab01atory with HistopatholOgy and Third Level X—Ray ServiCes, amOng others. ' 

The MHARSMC shall submit to the DOH its hospital _' development plan which includes the future expansion of its services ' and development of the medical center into a world class tertiary health care provider that utilizes modern and advanced medical  technologies pursuant to the. goals and objectives of the National ' Health Insurance Program '(NHIP) within six (6) months from the effectivity of this [RR The MHARSMC hospital development plan shall include provisions for future expansion of its scope of services as a specialty hospital. 

2. Change in Name 

By virtue of R. A No. 10865, the name of the hospital, Mayor ' Hilarion A. Ramiro, Sr. Regional Training and Teaching Hospital (MHARSRTTH) shall be changed to Mayor Hilarion A. Ramiro Sr. Medical Center (MHARSMC). Despite the change in name, the- MHARSMC shall remain as the designated regional training and teaching hospital with residency training programs for physicians, nurses, other disciplines, and serves as referral health care faCility of Region X 

3. Health Human Resource 

In case of detailed employees or deployment of Staff as a result of the Department of Health (DOH) rationalization plan, and/or the Conversion of MHARSRTTH into a Medical Center, the MHARSMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its existing health human resource Complement. 

The. MHARSMC shall evaluate the existing health human - - .' resources including key management positions, re—classify and/or propose upgrading of positions, promote professional”development' ' such as training of physicians and staff in the mediCal, nursing, ancillary and support services. Furthermore, it shall hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards pursuant to the purpose and intent of the Act.

The MHARSMC shall implement the stafﬁng Standard of a 500 bed capacity hospital following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. .- 2013—01, “Revised Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Standards for Government Hospitals, CY 2013 Edition” dated 23 I September 2013 -within three (3) years from the approval of this [RR. The MHARSMC shall coordinate with the DOH, DBM and Civil SerVice Commission (CSC) for the implementation of the appropriate stafﬁng in hospital 1 services eSpecially 1n critical or special areas. ' ' 

4. Assets and Liabilities 

All movable and immovable assets, liabilities and obligations as well as records of the MHARSMC shall. be properly updated and ' accounted for in accordance with the existing policies and guidelines, laws, as well as the issuance of Orders by any duly constituted authorities. 

5. Reports 

The Medical Center Chief of the MHARSMC through Regional Ofﬁce X shall, within three (3) months after the end of every ﬁscal year, submit periodic reports such as hospital statistical report”, ﬁnancial and physical accomplishment report to the DOH as may be - . required. Other reports shall be submitted to DOH Central Ofﬁce as needed. . . 

6. Equipment 

The MHARSMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH minimum standards of a Level 3 hospital as provided under DOH AO No. 2012-0012 and its amendment, and other. regulatory-agencies Additional state of the art equipment and facilities that complement the ' ' expansion of services and its upgrading shall be procured by DOH using the Health Facilities Enhancement Program (HFEP) Funds, Philippine Amusement and Gaming CorporatiOn (PAGCOR) funds, ' and other sources, until the hospital attains its mandated status, but not later than the third (3rd) year of its operation as medical center. 

7. Infrastructure 

The MHARSMC shall implement and seek the support of DOH I for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure and upgrading of facilities to conform with and be coMensurate to the increase in bed capacity as provided forin Section 2 of the Act, in compliance with the DOH licensing standards of a Level '3 medical center, and to all existing laws and standards, and Current international . standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others, not later than 2018; and previded that an amount in accordance to the Hospital Development Plan ' submitted by MHARSMC shall be allocated every year from the HFEP Funds and other sources. 

8. Systems Development 

The MHARSMC shall develop and implement the standards of hospital operations for assurance of hospital. quality services and provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirement” of the Integrated Hespital. Operations and Management Program (IHOMP) in gathering of. hospital data and information. 

9. Quality Management 

The MHARSMC shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program (CQIP), Patient Safety Program, Infection Prevention and Control Program, Health Care Waste Management Program, and other DOH policies and regulations, _ Standards of hospital operations prescribed in the DOH-Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB) Manuals,-Health Facilities and Services Regulatory Bureau (HFSRB), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other standards provided by international” health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

10. Assistance from other Government Ofﬁces 

Pursuant to Sectidn 8 of the Act, the MHARSMC may call- upon any department, bureau, ofﬁce, agency, or instrumentality of the - government, including government-owned or -c0ntrolled corporatiOns , for such assistance as it may need in the pursuit of its Objectives. 

All individuals, entities and institutions are hereby enjoined to” render full assistance and cooperation to the MHARSMC in the accomplishment of its objectives and activities. 

 

VI. Implementing Structure 

1. Administrative Control 

The MHARSMC shall be headed by a Medical Center Chief (MCC) appointed by the Secretary of Health. The MCC shall be responsible for the fellowing: (a) Overall management and administration of the MHARSMC including hospital operations, increase in bed capacity and upgrading of service capability pursuant to the implementation of the Act; and (b) Formulation of policies, plans, programs and strategies and its implementation- to ensure the provision of high quality health care and high standards of I clinical training for medical and allied medical personnel in conformance" to the clinical practice giiidelines and standards of hospital _. operations. 

The Secretary of Health or his/her authorized represetntative in coordination with the Ofﬁce for Field Implementation Management (OFIM) shall have oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations and ensure its . alignment to the DOH thrusts and objectives. It shall monitor. and may - recommend necessary upgrading guided by this Administrative Order. 

Further, the Health Facility Development Bueau (HFDB) shall provide the needed technical assistance in line with hospital upgrading, development and capacity building. 

2. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of R. A. No. 10865 shall be sourced out accordingly. - 

2.1 Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA) and hospital - ' income which includes PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and other ﬁnancing schemes subject to the prevailing . government rules and regulations effective FY 2017 and every year ' - _ - thereafter as provided under this AdministratiVe Order. ' 

2.2 The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and ' other ﬁnancing schemes subject to the prevailing government rules and regulations effective FY -.2017 . 

2.3 Personnel Services (PS) shall be appropriated to Carry out the full implementation of the stafﬁng pattern of 500 beds; and shall be implemented in compliance with D-..OH DBM Joint Circular 2013- 01 . dated september 23,2013 and other related issuances effective FY 2017. 

2.4. Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority.

3. Tax Exemption 

Pursuant to Section 9 of the Act, any donation or bequest made to the MHARSMC shall be exempt ﬁom imposition of donor’s tax and the same shal be considered as allowable deduction from the grOss income of the donor 1n accordance with the provisions of the NatiOnal Internal Revenue Code of 1997, as amended, provided, that such donation Shall not be disposed of transferred or sold. 

4. Audit

Pursuant to Section 10 of the Act, the Commission on Audit (COA) shall appoint a representative who shall be the auditor of the MHARSMC and such personnel as may be necessary to assist said representatives in the performance of his/her duty. 

VII. Repealing Clause 

The Administrative Order No. 2016-0026, “Implemting Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 7937, An Act Converting the MayorHilarion " ' A. Ramiro, Sr. General Hospital in Ozamiz City, Misamis Occidental. into a _ Regional Training and Teaching Hospital to be knOwn as the Mayor Hilarion ' I A..Ramiro, Sr. Regional Training and Teaching Haspital, and Appropriating Funds T herefor” as well as other issuances that. are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this order are hereby repealed, amended or modiﬁed accordingly. - - 

VIII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after its publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.
</body>

<sign>PAULYN JEAN B. ROSELL-UBIAL, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
