Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>JUN 21, 2016</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2016 - 0022</docnum>


<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regglations of Republic Act No. 7266 “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Celestine Gallares Memorial Hospital in Tagbilaran City, Province of Bohol, from Two Hundred (200) to Two Hundred Twenty-Five (225) Beds, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” </subject>


<body>
I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The Gov. Celestine Gallares Memorial Hospital (GCGMI-I), originally named as the Bohol Provincial Hospital was constructed under Act No. 3114 as amended by Act No. 3168. The ﬁrst hospital building was ofﬁcially opened on October 19, 1929 with an eight (8) bed capacity per Board Resolution No. 1715. 

In 1980, the Bohol Provincial Hospital was designated as Regional Teaching / Training hospital for Region VII with an authorized ISO—bed capacity per Ministry of Health Administrative Order No. 83 series of 1980. In 1984, Bohol Provincial Hospital was renamed Governor Celestine Gallares Memorial Hospital with a 200— bed capacity per Betas Pambansa Blg. 640. On March 20, 1992, Republic Act No. 7266, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Celestine Gallares Memorial Hospital in Tagbilaran City, Province of Bohol, from Two Hundred (200) to Two Hundred Twenty-Five (225) Beds, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”, was approved into law. 

With the implementation of Administrative Order 2012-0012, as amended, GCGMH was reclassiﬁed from Level 3 to Level 2 hospital. Presently, GCGMH has ﬁve (5) accredited residency training programs namely Pediatrics, Internal Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Surgery and Pathology. Aside from the four (4) major clinical services, the following services are offered by the hospital: Clinical Laboratory (Tertiary), Blood Bank, HIV Testing Laboratory, Pharmacy, Hemodialysis Clinic (10 stations), Diagnostic X-ray Services (Level 3), Specialized Diagnostic X- ray Services, Computed Tomography, Emergency Room Services, Outpatient Services, TB DOTS, Dental Services, Animal Bite Treatment Center, Diabetes Clinic, Smoking Cessation Clinic, Breast Clinic, Women and Child Protection Unit, Newborn Screening, Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Medical Intensive Care Unit, Surgical Special Care Unit, Burn Unit, Anesthesia, Psychology Unit, Drug Testing Center, Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Maternal Intensive Care Unit, Public Health Unit, and Public Assistance Complaint Desk. 

As a regional hospital of Region VII, the GCGMH serves the patients of Bohel, Cebu, Negros Oriental, as primary catchment population and the neighboring island mmncipalities of Southern Leyte in Region VIII and neighboring provinces of Region X. 

In the last three (3) years (2013-2015), the average annual bed occupancy rate of GCGMH was 136%. To accommodate the increasing number of patients and to provide quality health care, there is a need to fully implement the 225 authorized bed capacity of GCGMH with upgraded equipment, facilities and corresponding number of health human resource based on DOH and other accreditation standards. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations for Republic Act No. 7266, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Celestino Gallares Memorial Hospital in Tagbilaran City, Province of Bohol, from Two Hundred (200') to Two Hundred Twenty-Five (225) Beds, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

III. SCOPE 

The Implementing Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall pertain only to the provisions of RA No. 7266. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. Act — refers here to Republic Act No. 7266, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Celestino Gallares Memorial Hospital in Tagbilaran City, Province of Bohol, from Two Hundred (200) to Two Hundred Twenty- Five (225) Beds, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”. 

2. AO No. 2012-0012 - refers to the “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines” dated 18 July 2012, as amended. 

3. DBM — Department of Budget and Management 

4. GCGMH - refers to Governor Celestino Gallares Memorial Hospital 

5. Hospital Bed Capacity - pertains to the number of hospital beds as authorized by law. 

6. Level 2 hospital — as classified in DOH Administrative Order No. 2012— 0012. 

7. Level 3 hospital —as classiﬁed in DOH Administrative Order No. 2012- 0012-A. 

8. Referral hospital - refers to a health care institution capable of accepting referrals from lower level hospitals and renders general and specialized health care services. 


V. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The GCGMH, as a teaching and training hospital with a two hundred twenty-ﬁve (225) bed capacity, shall provide a tertiary level of promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative health care services and research. It shall be fully equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resource. 

Furthermore, the GCGMH shall strengthen its toasting services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital; complementing the services of local government health care facilities in the province and the region. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the Hospital Development Plan of GCGMH. 

B. Implementing Guidelines 

In support of the implementation of RA No. 7266, the following guidelines shall be implemented: ' 

1. Expansion of Services 

The GCGMH shall operate as a 225 bed level 2 hospital with additional. services in Respiratory Therapy Unit, Rehabilitation Medicine, Ambulatory Surgery, Family Medicine and be continuously upgraded to be a fully operational level 3 hospital by year 2017. 

Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established based on the Hospital Development Plan. 

2. Health Human Resource 

In case of detailed employees, the GCGMH shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource complement, re—classify and/or propose upgrading of positions, promote professional development and shall hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards for a level 3 end-referral hospital pursuant to the purpose and intent of Republic Act No. 7266. 

The GCGMH shall implement the stafﬁng standard of a 225 bed capacity hospital following the DEM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01, ”Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

 
3. Assets and Liabilities 

All movable and immovable assets, liabilities and obligations as well as records of the GCGMH shall be properly updated and shall be accomited for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The GCGMH shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH minimum standards of a Level 3 hospital as provided for under DOH A0 No. 2012- 0012, as amended and other regulatory agencies. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of the DOH until the hospital attains its mandated status. 

5. Infrastructure 

The GCGMH shall implement and seek the support of DOH for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure based on the Hospital Development Plan and to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The GCGMH shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of the Integrated 

Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The GCGMH shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program (CQIP), Patient Safety, DOH policies and regulations, standards of hospital operations prescribed in the DOH-Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB') manuals, Health Facilities and Services Regulatory Bureau (HF SRB), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Philhealth) and other health organization standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

 
VI. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

1. Administrative Control 

The Medical Center Chief of GCGMH shall be accountable and responsible for the operation and management relative to the increase in bed capacity, upgrading of service capability and the implementation of all other provisions of RA No. 7266. 

The DOH Regional Ofﬁce VII shall have oversight jurisdiction and control over the hospital operations of GCGMH and shall monitor the implementation of RA. No. 7266. Likewise, it may recommend further necessary upgrading guided by this Administrative Order. 

Further, the Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB) shall provide the needed technical assistance in line with hospital upgrading, development and capacity building. 

2. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 7266 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

2.1 Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes PhilI-Iealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2.2 The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and/or other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2.3 The budget for Personnel Services (PS) shall be appropriated to carry out the full implementation of the stafﬁng pattern of 225-beds; and shall be implemented in compliance with DOH-DEM Joint Circular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

2.4 Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority. 

VII. REPEALING/SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly.

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VII. EFFECTIVITY 

This order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, MD, MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>