Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>JUN 13,2016</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2016 - 0019</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 7198 “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Western Visayas Medical Center in Mandurriao, Iloilo City, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”</subject>


<body>
I. RATIONALE / BACKGROUND 

The Western Visayas Medical Center (WVMC) started in 1946 as an emergency hospital at the Doane Woody Bldg. located in Lapaz, Iloilo City. In 1950, the hospital was transferred to Q. Abeto St. Mandurriao, Iloilo City on a lot donated by benevolent Mandurriaonons. It was inaugurated as the Iloilo Provincial Hospital (IPH) on May 12, 1950. 

In June 1974, IPH was upgraded into a 200-bed capacity hospital and in 1975, the IPH was again upgraded to a 300-bed capacity hospital and designated as the Regional Training & Teaching hospital in Western Visayas. 

On February 25, 1992, Republic Act No. 7198, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Western Visayas Medical Center in Mandurriao, Iloilo City, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”, upgraded the bed capacity from three hundred (300) to four hundred (400) beds. Subsequently, in a Memorandum Order dated July 1, 1995, WVMC assumed the full technical and administrative supervision of the 25-bed capacity Pototan Mental Health Unit (PMHU) following the unit’s alignment to the Medical Center in 1988 thus making WVMC’S total bed capacity to 425 beds. 

Due to the absence of IR for the implementation of RA 7198, WVMC’S Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) allocation is appropriated for the 300 authorized bed capacity. However the data on the Bed occupancy Rate (BOR) in the last ﬁve years from 2010—2014 showed the average of 139.67 %. Hence to address the increasing number of patients, the WVMC implements the 400-bed capacity. 

At present, the WVMC has twelve (12) accredited Departments such as Surgery, Anesthesiology, Internal Medicine, Pediatrics, OBGYNE, Orthopedics, Family and Community Medicine, Radiology, Ophthalmology, ENT—HN S, Psychiatry, and Dental Medicine with accredited Sub—specialties in Surgery Department which includes General Surgery with sub-specialty on Neuro—surgery, Thoracovascular surgery, Pediatric surgery and Obstetrics—Gynecology cases. For Orthopedics, it offers General Orthopedic surgery, Spine surgery, Joint replacement and Arthroscopy and the like. Dialysis Center is available at the WVMC. For convenience of the patients, the WVMC implements ﬁve (5) satellite Pharmacies and the main hospital Pharmacy is considered as the distribution hub for the Inter-local Health Zones and other Local Government Units. 

The WVMC as a teaching-training hospital, continues to envision as a Center of Excellence for tertiary health care and the approval of its IRR shall pave the way to the achievement of the goals and objectives to provide a comprehensive, compassionate, affordable, culture friendly, effective, efﬁcient and integrated health care system for Region VI. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations ORR) of RA No. 7198 to increase its bed capacity from 300 to 400. 

III. SCOPE OF IMPLEMENTATION 

These rules and regulations are adopted prescribing guidelines and procedures for the implementation of RA 7198 to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the objectives thereof. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. Act— refers to Republic Act No. 7198, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Western Visayas Medical Center in Mandurriao, Iloilo City, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” 

2. AO 2012-0012 — refers to the “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines” dated 18 July 2012 

3. AO 2012-0012-A — the Order amending certain provisions and speciﬁc annexes in A0 No. 2012-0012 dated 18 July 2012 

4. Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds offered by the hospital for inpatient care 

5. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) - refers to the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period, and 

6. Level 3— as clasSiﬁed in Administrative Order No. 2012-0012-A dated September 3,2015 

V. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The WVMC shall provide tertiary health care with specialty and sub-specialty services and fully departmentalized medical and nursing services. It shall be provided with upgraded facilities, updated medical equipment and technology. Likewise it shall be complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources appropriate for a licensed and accredited level 3 hospital implementing 400 beds. 

B. Implementing Guidelines 

In support to the upgrading of the hospital, the following guidelines shall be- implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

By the year 2018, WC shall fully operate as Level 3 hospital, with an authorized 400 bed capacity and appropriate fund requirements to become a cancer center and geriatric center of the Western Visayas. 

2. Health Human Resource 

In case of deployment of staff as a result of the DOH Rationalization Plan, the WVMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of human resource complements including detailed employees. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resources, re-classify and /or propose upgrading of positions, promote professional development and shall hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH licensing standards and requirements pursuant to the purpose and intent of RA No. 7198. 

The WVMC shall implement the staﬂ'mg standard of a 400 bed capacity Level 3 hOSpital following the DEM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01,“Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All movable and immovable assets as well as records of WVMC shall be accounted for and shall be properly updated in accordance with the existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The WVMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and shall undertake upgrading thereof to conform with the safety and to the DOH minimum standards of a Level 3 hospital as provided in the DOH Licensing Regulation. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of the DOH. 

5. Infrastructure 

The WVMC shall seek the support of the DOH for the construction/repair /renovation of the physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with the Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The WVMC shall strengthen its services and inter-facility referral systems. Likewise, it shall sustain the implementation of standard hospital operations and enhance its information management system consistent with the various DOH Manual of Hospital 

Operations, DOH Scorecard and the Philhealth Benchbook. The WVMC shall implement an electronic information system that conforms to the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The WVMC shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program, Patient Safety, policies and standards of the DOH, the Manuals of Hospital Operations issued by the Health Facility Development Bureau of the DOH, the PhilHealth, and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control 

The Medical Center Chief of WVMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH—Central Ofﬁce through the DOH Regional Ofﬁce No. VI. 

The DOH Regional Ofﬁce No. VI shall monitor the implementation of Republic Act No. 7198 and may recommend further upgrading as guided by this Administrative Order. Further, the Health Facility Development Bureau (HF DB) shall provide technical assistance to the hospital when necessary. 

B. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of the Republic Act No. 7198 shall be sourced accordingly. 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital revenues, Philhealth reimbursements and other ﬁnancing schemes subject to the prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2. The additional Maintenance, Operating and Other Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income which includes Philhealth payments, public-private partnership and/or other ﬁnancing schemes subject to the prevailing government rules and regulations. 

3. Personnel Services (PS) shall be appropriated to carry out the full implementation of the stafﬁng pattern of a 400 bed capacity hospital in compliance with DOH-DBM Joint Circular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances which shall be sourced from the GAA 2018 onwards. 

4. Release of funds shall be approved by the designated appropriate authority. 

VII. REPEALING/SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions from previous. issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY 

This order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the Official Gazette and in a newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>


<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, MD, MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 

