Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>APR 20, 2017</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2017 - 0006 </docnum>


<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Review and Approval of the Water Safety Plans of Drinking-Water Service Providers 
</subject>


<body>
I. RATIONALE 

Pursuant to the promotion of the health and well—being of every Filipino, the Department of Health (DOH) has issued Administrative Order (AO) No. 2014-0027, dated September 4, 2014 requiring all drinking-water service providers to develop and implement Water Safety Plan (WSP) to ensure the delivery of safe drinking-water. Under the AO, speciﬁc guidelines for the review and approval of WSPs are necessary to guide key stakeholders in the evaluation of WSP development. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This Administrative Order shall set the guidelines for the review and approval of WSP. Speciﬁcally, the creation of review committees at different levels and detailed procedures in the evaluation and approval of WSP. 

III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE 

This Order applies to all drinking-water service providers, DOH deputized agencies, and the DOH authorized ofﬁces. 

IV.- DEFINITION OF TERMS 

1. Academe — a learning institution that offers courses relevant to risk management, water supply and sanitation, or environmental management; 

2. Academic Institution — refers to DOH recognized academe in the country to undertake the review of WSPs from any drinking-water service providers in the absence of a WSP review committee in the region; 

3. Certificate of WSP Acceptance — a document issued by the DOH or its authorized ofﬁce attesting WSP approval; 

4. Drinking-Water Service Provider — any company, agency, or institution in-charge of operating a potable water supply system; 

5. Peer-Reviewer — a staff of a drinking-water service provider who has technical knowledge and expertise on WSP; 

6. Water Regulator — a government agency that prescribes and monitors compliance to rules and regulations set for all drinking-water service providers under its jurisdic ion; 

7. Water Safety Plan (W SP) — a document that contains a comprehensive risk - . ﬂ assessment and risk management approach encompassing all steps in water supp from catchment to consumer to consistently ensure the safety of drinking water; 

8. Water-related Agency — a government entity with mandates and functions on the provision of drinking water; 

9. WSP Evaluation Tool — an instrument used to determine the completeness and acceptability of WSP as basis for its approval. 

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

1. All drinking-water service providers are mandated to secure an approved WSP from the DOH or its authorized ofﬁce. A'drinking-water service provider who fails to renew a Certiﬁcate of WSP Acceptance shall be considered a violation of these rules and regulations. 

2. All drinking—water service providers operating without an approved WSP during the 3-year grace period from September 4, 2014 to August, 4, 2017 shall be allowed to operate subject toregular water quality testing as prescribed in the Philippine National Standards for Drinking Water by concerned local health ofﬁces and/or deputized agencies. A drinking- water service provider who failed to secure a Certiﬁcate of WSP Acceptance at the end of the 3— —year grace period shall be considered a violation of these rules and regulations. 

3. The WSP Review Committees and Secretariat will be organized at various levels to' facilitate the review of the WSP submitted by the different drinking water service providers. 

4. A detailed procedure in the review and approval of WSP will be deVeloped to guide the different stakeholders 0n the process 

5. The DOH Central Ofﬁce Shall authorize the DOH Regional Ofﬁces and DeputiZed '_ Agencies 1n order to fast track approval of WSP at the all levels. ' 

VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES 

1. Organization of WSP Review Committees and Secretariat

A. Composition 

National Level 

a. National WSP Review Committee of DOH shall be:

i. Composed of ﬁve (5) members from DOH, the Water Regulator, Water- related Agencies, the Academe and a Peer Reviewer; 
ii. Chaired by the DO,H and 
iii. Assisted by a Secretariat from the Chairperson’ 5 ofﬁce 

The National WSP Review Committee of DOH shall function in the absence of the Regional WSP Review Committee. 

b National WSP Review Committee of Deputized Agencies shall be: 
i. Composed of ﬁve (5) members from deputized agency (2 representatives), DOH Central or Regional Ofﬁce, Water-related Agency or the Academe and a Peer Reviewer from drinking-Water service providers; 
ii. Chaired by the Deputized Agency; and 
iii. Assisted by a Secretariat from the Chairperson’s ofﬁce. 

Regional Level 

a. Regional WSP Review Committee of DOH shall be. 

i. Composed of ﬁve (5) members from the DOH Regional Ofﬁce (from Local Health Support and Regulation and Licensing Divisions), Provincial Health Ofﬁce (Environmental Sanitation Unit), Water-related Agency or the Academe, and a Peer Reviewer; 
ii. Chaired by the Regulation and Licensing Division of the DOH Regional Ofﬁce, and 
iii. Assisted by a Secretariat from the Chairperson’ 8 ofﬁce. 

b. Regional WSP Review Committee of Deputized Agencies Shall be: 

i. Composed of ﬁve (5) members from the deputized agency, the DOH . Regional Ofﬁce, Water—related Agency, the Academe and a Peer Reviewer from drinking- water service providers, 
ii. Chaired by the deputized agency; and 
iii. Assisted by a Secretariat from the Chairperson’s ofﬁce. 

Local Level 
a. Local WSP Review Committee shall be: 

i. Composed of ﬁve (5) members from the Local Drinking Water Quality Monitoring COmrnittee (LDWQMC), Municipal/ City Health Ofﬁce (M/CHO), Engineering Ofﬁce, Provincial Health Ofﬁce (Environmental SanitatiOn Unit) Municipal/City Environment and Natural Resources Ofﬁce (M/CENRO)/ or the Academe, and the Local Water District or Peer Reviewer, 
ii. Chaired by the municipal/city local health ofﬁcer; and 
iii. Assisted by a Secretariat from the Chairperson’s ofﬁce, 

In the absence of the LDWQMC, the DOH Regional WSP Review Committee shall serve as the Local WSP Review Committee, until the Local WSP Review Committee is established. 

B. Qualifications of the WSP Review Committee Member 

Agency/sector members in the National, Regional and. Local WSP Review Committees shall have attended at least the basic orientation course on water safety plan or its equivalent and shall possess any of the following minimum requirements: 

a. Has a baccalaureate degree related to water supply and sanitation such as engineering (Civil, Sanitary, Environmental, Chemical), public health and environmental disciplines; 

b. With technical knowledge and three-year experience in managing/operating a water utility; and 

c. With technical knowledge and three-year experience - managing/implementing water and sanitation programs and projects. 

C. Functions of the WSP Review Committee, Chairperson and Secretariat 

a. WSP Review Committee shall:
i. Evaluate the completeness and acceptability of submitted WSP; 
ii. Recommend approval of the complete and acceptable WSP; and 
iii. If the reviewed WSP is unacceptable, inform the applicant to revise, improve and resubmit WSP. 

b. Chairperson shall:
i. Call the committee members and preside over the review process; and 
ii. Direct and supervise the activities of the Secretariat. 

c. Secretariat shall: 
i. Review the completeness of the submitted draft WSP; 
ii. Return incomplete draft WSP to the applicant; 
iii. Receive complete WSP submitted for review; 
iv. Furnish copies of the complete WSP document to members of the WSP Review Committee; 
v. Prepare the minutes of the WSP Review Committee meetings; and 
vi. Follow-up on the status of WSP approval and inform the applicant of its status after 15 working days of indorsement to the approving agency. 

D. DOH Authorized Ofﬁce 

a. The Regional Health Ofﬁce is hereby designated as the DOH authorized ofﬁce; 
b. The Regional Health Director shall be the duly authorized representative of the Secretary of Health and has the authority to approve, reject, suspend or revoke the WSP based on the recommendation of the WSP Review Committee. 

E. DOH Deputized Agencies As stipulated in Section IX. A. 2 of AO No. 2014- 0027, the DOH shall designate, deputize, coordinate or call other agencies that can assist in the implementation of the national policy on WSP. Therefore, the DOH hereby deputizes the following agencies: 

a. Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA)
b. Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS)
c.  Philippine Economic Zone Authority (PEZA) 
d. Bases Conversion Development Authority (BCDA) 
e. Tourism Infrastructure and Economic Zone Authority (TIEZA) 
f. Local Government Units (LGUs) 
g. Academic Institutions 

F. Review and Approval Process The review process shall cover the following: 

Stage 1: Submission of WSP 
a. All application for WSP Review shall be submitted to appropriate DOH authorized ofﬁce or deputized agency. 
b. There shall be a review fee per application by such amount as existing law prescribed or in accordance with their respective guidelines. 

Stage 2: Screening of WSP application 
a. The Secretariat shall review the contents of the submitted WSP using a DOH prescribed form. 
b. Incomplete WSP shall be returned to the Applicant. 
c. Only complete WSP shall be forwarded to the WSP Review Committee. 

Stage 3. Evaluation of the Draft WSP 
a. The WSP Review Committee shall conduct the review at a maximum of 30 calendar days from the day the application IS ﬁled. 
b. The draft WSP shall be evaluated according to its acceptability and the over-all passing rate for WSP Acceptance is 60%, with no individual score below 60% in any WSP Sections/Steps. 

Stage 4. Approval of the Draft WSP 
a. The Head of the deputized agency shall endorse the result of the review to DOH or DOH authorized Ofﬁce for approVal. 
b. A Certiﬁcate of WSP Acceptance issued by DOH Secretary or its Authorized Representative for any approved WSP Shall be valid for three (3) years from the day of Issuance 
c. The drinking-water service provider shall apply for renewal of certiﬁcate of acceptance and shall pay corresponding fees covering three (3) years in DOH authorized ofﬁces or deputized agencies. 
d. Application for renewal shall be ﬁled three (3) months before the expiration date. 

G. Suspension/Revocation of Certiﬁcate of WSP Acceptance 

a. The Department of Health or its authorized ofﬁce shall suspend or revoke the Certiﬁcate of WSP Acceptance for non-implementation of the approved WSP. 

b. The drinking-water service provider shall be required to correct any non- conforming items or activities within the speciﬁed period set by the Department or its authorized ofﬁce. Failure to comply may deem issuance of Cease and Desist Order against the drinking-water service provider particularly when the drinking water quality is compromised that may lead to outbreak of water-borne disease 

H. WSP Monitoring 

The DOH, its authorized ofﬁce and deputized agencies shall prepare a Monitoring and‘Evaluation Plan as well as maintain a database of all drinking  water service providers with water safety plans at all levels. There shall be an annual monitoring of WSP implementation. 

VII. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

a. DOH Central Ofﬁce  

i. Develop a WSP Evaluation Tool that will be used in the review and approval of WSP; 
ii. Create a National WSP Review Committee to undertake the review in the absence of an established DOH Authorized or Deputized WSP Review Committee, 
iii. Issue Certiﬁcate of WSP Acceptance; and ' ‘ 
iv. Establish a reporting system for the review'and approval of WSP by DOH authorized and deputized agencies. 

b. DOH Regional Ofﬁces  
i. Create a Regional WSP Review Committee for WSP of LGUs, bulk water service providers, housing subdivision private water service providers, and other recognized water service providers; 
ii. Issue Certiﬁcate of Acceptance for WSP of LGUs, bulk Water service providers, housing subdivision water service providers, and other recognized water service prOviders that have passed the review process; and 
iii. Prepare and submit to DOH Central Ofﬁce yearly accomplishment report which includes the number of WSP received, reviewed and approved by DOH Regional Ofﬁce and summary of the accomplishment report 1 submitted by the LGUS. 

c. Local Water Utilities Administration 

i. Create a WSP Review Committee for WSP of Local Water Districts and Rural Wateerrks and Sanitation Associations; 
ii. Recommend to the DOH the approval of the WSPs of Local Water Districts and RWSAs that have passed the review process, and 
iii. Prepare and submit to DOH Central Ofﬁce yearly accomplishment report which includes the number of WSP received, reviewed and indorsed for approval. 

d. Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System; Philippine Export Processing Zone Authority; Bases Conversion Development Authority; Tourism Infrastructure and Economic Zone Authority; 

i. Create a WSP Review Committee for WSP of private concessionaires under its jurisdiction, 
ii. Recommend to the DOH the approval of WSP of private concessionaires under its jurisdiction that have passed the review process; and 
iii. Prepare and submit to DOH Central Ofﬁce yearly accomplishment report- which includes the number of WSP received, reviewed and indorsed for approval. - 

e. Municipal/City Local Government Units 

i. Create the Local WSP Review Committee for WSP of Barangay Waterworks and Sanitation . AssociatiOns (BWSAs), drinking- water service cooperatives, retail drinking-water service providers, mobile drinking-water service providers, and Community based Waterworks; 

ii. Indorse the recommendation of the Local WSP Review Committee to the . DOH Regional Ofﬁce for approval of WSP cf Barangay Waterworks and Sanitation Associations (BWSAs), drinking—water service cooperatives, retail drinking-water service providers, mobile drinking-water service providers, and Community based waterworks, and ' 

iii. Prepare and submit to DOH Regional Ofﬁce yearly accomplishment report which includes the number of WSP received, reviewed and '- indorsed.

f. Academic Institutions 

i. Secure authorization from DOH to undertake WSP Review; 
ii. Create a WSP Review Committee for WSP from any drinking- water service providers in the absence of a WSP review Committee in the region,
iii. Recommend approval by the DOH of the reviewed WSP; and 
iv. Prepare and submit to DOH yearly accomplishment report. 

g. Water service provider 
i. Prepare and submit WSP; 
ii. Revise the WSP accordingly based on the comments and recommendations of the Review Committee; 
iii. Implement the approved WSP. 

VIII. PENAL PROVISION 

As provided in Sec. 103 of the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines (PD No. 856): 
a. Any person who shall violate, disobey, refuse, Omit or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of these rules and regulations, shall be guilty of misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six (6) months or by a ﬁne of not exceeding Php 1,000.00 or both depending upon the discretion of the court. 

b. Any person who shall interfere with or hinder, or oppose any ofﬁcer, agent or member of the Department or of the bureaus and ofﬁces under it, in the performance of his duty as such under these rules and regulations, or shall tear down, mutilate, deface or alter any placard, or notice, afﬁxed to the premises in the enforcement of these rules and regulations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable upon conviction by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six - (6) months or by a ﬁne of not exceeding Php 1,000.00 or both depending upon the discretion of the court. 

IX. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

In the event that any rule, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or word of this Order is declared invalid for any reason, the other provisions thereof shall not be affected thereby. 

X. REPEALING CLAUSE 

All pertinent rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed or amended accordingly. 

XI. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect after ﬁfteen (15) days from the date of publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>

<sign>PAULYN JEAN B. ROSELL-UBIAL, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>