Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>03/03/2014</date>
<doctype>DEPARTMENT ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. do20 - do2014-0032 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Release and Utilization of the Sub-allotment of Fund to the 17 Centers for Health Development (CHDs') for the Hiring of Contractual Architects and Engineers to- Support the Infrastructure Units of the Centers for Health Development for the Planning, Design Development and Evaluation and Monitoring of Implementation of the 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 Health Facilities Enhancement Program Projects of the Department of Health </subject>
<body>

I. Rationale: 

It is the target of the DOH under the Aquino Health Agenda to make progress in preventing premature deaths, reducing maternal and newborn deaths, controlling both communicable and non-communicable diseases, improving access to quality health facilities and services, and increasing national health insurance beneﬁt delivery rate, prioritizing the poor and the marginalized population. 

The 2014 HFEP projects nationwide, as well as the 2013 HFEP projects, need to be completed by December 31,2014 to pave the way for the functioning and operations of the BEmONCs and C EmONCs to contribute to the reduCtion in maternal and newborn deaths. However, problems may exist that may prevent its realization. The reasons are summarized below. 

The- implementation of the 2014 as well as the 2011 to 2013 HFEP projects infrastructure component involve four main stages PreDesign, Schematic Design or Preliminary Planning, Detailed Architectural and Engineering Design, Procurement, and. Construction and Project Turnover. In every stage, the Central and Regional Ofﬁces of the DOH and the Local Government Units (as HFEP beneﬁciaries) are expected to deliver on their crucial assignments in order to meet the targeted December 31, 2014 deadline: DOH Central Ofﬁce for ove1all HFEP coordination, setting of design standards and technical guidelines and schematic plan evaluation and approval, and the DOH Regional Ofﬁces or ROS for disseminati 111 of standards and guidelines, provision of technical assist in design andplan preparatio 1, 1 eparation of schematic designs and detailed plans, procurement of works and monitoring of construction. 

In view of the pivotal roles of the ROs in HF EP implementation and the fact that there IS a lack of human resource in the ROS for architects and engineers to fulﬁl their roles in a timely and effient manner, the DOH, upon the recommendation of the Health Facility Development Bureau, has agreed to allow-the CHDs to hire architects and additional engineers for one (1) year to augment and strengthen their present infrastructure units, and to sub-allot funds to the ROS for the purpose.  

Further, the DOH, has entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the United Architects of the Philippines (UAP), the duly accredited professional organization of architects in the Philippines, for the UAP, through its regional/provincial chapters, to facilitate the search for architects and. to assist the ROs in the selection of the most competent and trustworthy architects. 

II. Objective: 

To provide additional manpower to the ROs in order to 

a. Prepare preliminary and detailed designs for their 2014 Health Facilities Enhancement Program infrastructure projects; 

b. Evaluate these plans based on DOH standards and guidelines at the shortest possible time to facilitate the start of procurement and construction; 

c. Strengthen and regularize the supervision and monitoring of 2014 as well as 2011 to 2013 HFEPprojects to ensure their completion within the targeted time frame; 

d. Assist the LGUs in project acceptance. 

III. General Guidelines 

The Department of Health Central Ofﬁce shall sub-allot funds in the total amount of P27,415,560 to the 17 R05 in their 2014 budget for hiring of contractual staff where each R0 will hire the contractual architects and engineers with recommended duties and responsibilities, qualiﬁcations and compensation based on attached Terms of Reference and cost matrix for one (1) year exclusive of per diems, travelling expenses and other applicable beneﬁts. This sub-allotment shall. be chargeable against the MOOE funds .of the Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB). 

IV. Responsibility of the Receiving Agency: 

a. The RO Director shall ensure that the person-in—charge of hiring these contractual staff and the Budget/Accounting Division are properly informed of these guidelines. 

b. The RO Director shall coordinate with the UAP provincial chapters to verify the good standing and competencies of the architect applicants. Likewise with the provincial chapter of respective engineering organization of the engineer applicants. 

c. The Administrative Ofﬁcer shall be responsible for the implementation and monitoring of sub—.alloted funds as approved by the RO Director. 
 
d. The RO shall prepare and submit a Monthly Fund Utilization report with all the pertinent supporting documents. This shall be submitted to the Finance Service on or before the 7th day of the following month. 

e. Fund utilization/ disbursement covered by these guidelines shall be subject to the usual government budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations. 

By Authority of the Secretary of Health: 

</body>
 <sign>BLESILDA GUTIERREZ, CPA, MBA </sign> 
 <signtitle> Assistant Secetary of Health 
 Internal Finance Management Technical Cluster </signtitle>



