REPUBLIKA NG PILIPINAS
KAGAWARAN NG KALUSUGAN
TANGGAPAN NG KALIHIM
MAYNILA

<date>08/06/1970</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 125 S. 1970</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: REGULATION PRESCRIBING THE STANDARD OF IDENTITY, QUALITY AND FILL OF CONTAINER FOR CANNED PINEAPPLE.</subject>

<body>
1.0 Identity: Canned pineapple is the food prepared from optional forms of units obtained from peeled, cored, mature fruits of the pineapple plant and shall have a normal color, flavor and odor free from the flavors and odors foreign to the product. The canned pineapple shall have a reasonably good texture; the fruitlets shall be reasonably compact in structure; and the product shall be fairly free from porosity.

1.1 The optional forms of units obtained from the peeled, cored, mature fruits of the p1neapple p1ant are:
a) Whole: cylindrical whole unit with the core removed.
b) Sliced, Slices or Spiral: Slices or Whole Slices or Rings: Uniformly cut circular slices or rings cut across the axis of the peeled, cored pineapple cylinders.
c) Half Slices, Half Sliced: uniformly cut, approximately semi—circular halves of slices.
d) Quarter Slices: uniformly cut, one fourth portion
e) Broken Sliced, Broken Slices: arc—shaped portions which may not be uniform in size and/or shape.
f) Spears or Fingers: long slender pieces cut radially and lengthwise of the cored pineapple cylinder, predominantly 65 mm. or longer.
g) Tidbits: reasonably uniform, wedge shaped sectors cut from slices or portions thereof, predominantly from 8 mm to 13 mm thick.
h) Chunks: short, thick pieces cut from thick slices and/or from peeled cored pineapple and predominantly more than 12 mm in both thickness and width, and 1ess than 38 mm in length
i) Diced or Cubes: reasonably uniform, cube-shaped pieces, predominantly 14 mm or less in the longest edge dimensions.
j) Pieces: irregular shapes and sizes not identifiable as a specific style and does not include "chunks" or "chips" style.
k) Chips: small, irregular shapes and sizes of pineapple pieces similar to that left over after dicing of pineapple, and which may be included in crushed style.
l) Crushed or Crisp Cut: finely cut or shredded or grated or diced pieces of pineapple and which may include chips in the crushed mess.

1.2 The optional packing media are:
a) Water: in which water or any mixture of water and pineapple juice, is the sole packing medium.
b) Pineapple Juice: in which the pineapple juice conforms to the definition and standards of identity and quality for pineapple juice as specified by the Food and Drug Administration except that it is not required to be separately sealed in containers and so processed by heat as to prevent spoilage, or clarified juice which is the liquid collected from cutting various forms of units from pineapple fruits, or the liquid expressed wholly or in part from the pineapple flesh or parts thereof, which liquid is clarified and maybe further refined or concentrated.
c) Syrup: in which water or juice is combined with one or more of the following nutritive sweeteners - sucrose, invert sugar, dextrose, dried glucose syrup - and classified on the basis of cut-out strength as:

Extra Light Syrup - not lees than 10° Brix
Light Syrup - not less than 14° Brix
Heavy Syrup - not less than 18° Brix
Extra Heavy Syrup - not less than 22° Brix

The optional forms of units like sliced, slices, half-sliced, half slices, broken sliced, broken slices, tidbits, chunks, cubes, diced, spears, fingers and crushed are canned with any of the optional packing media. Canned pineapples may be flavored or seasoned with one or more of the optional ingredients. Dimethypolysiloxane may be employed as a defoaming agent in an amount not greater than 10 parts per million by weight of the finished food. Such food is sealed in containers. and is so processed by heat, either before or after sealing as to prevent spoilage.

1.3 The optional sweetening ingredients are:
a) Sugar
b) Invert sugar syrup
c) Any mixture of sugar and invert syrup sugar
d) Any of the above optional sweetening ingredients with dextrose, provided that the weight of the solids of dextrose does not exceed one-third of the total weight of the solids of the combined sweetening ingredients.
e) Any of the above optional sweetening ingredients with corn syrup or dried corn syrup or with glucose syrup or with dried glucose syrup, or with any two or more of these, provided that the weight of the solids of corn syrup, dried corn syrup, glucose syrup, and dried glucose syrup, in case two or more of these are used, does not exceed one fourth of the combined sweetening ingredients.
f) Any mixture of the optional ingredients in (d) & (e).

1.4 The optional ingredients are as follows:
a) Spice
b) Flavoring, Natural and Permissible
c) Vinegar

2 Label Statement of Optional Ingredients
a) The name "pineapple" is preceded or followed, for each of the indicated optional forms of units by the words here specified:
1) "Whole";
2) "Sliced", "Slices" or "Spiral Slices" or "Whole Slices" or "Rings";
3) "Half Slices";
4) "Quarter Slices";
5) "Broken Slices";
6) "Spears" or "Fingers";
7) "Tidbits";
8) "Chunks";
9) "Diced" or "Cubes";
10) "Pieces";
11) "Chips";
12) "Crushed" or "Crisp Cut".
b) If the optional form of unit is specified by the work "crushed" or "crisp-cut", the name is "pineapple" preceded or followed by the word "crushed" or "crisp cut". If the crushed or crisp cut pineapple, when drained yields not less than 73% but less than 78% by weight of drained material, the word "crushed" or "crisp-cut" or the words "crushed or crisp-cut pineapple" in the name of the food may be preceded or followed by the words "heavy pack" and if it yields 78% more by weight of drained material the word "crushed" or "crisp-cut" or the words "crushed or crisp-cut pineapple" may be preceded or followed by the words "solid packed".
c) The labels of canned pineapple prepared from the optional forms of pineapple except the "crushed" or "crisp-cut" form shall bear the name of the optional packing medium preceded by "in" or "packed in". Whenever the optional packing medium pineapple juice is used, the words "pineapple juice" may be preceded by the word "unsweetened". The label of crushed or crisp-cut pineapple canned with optional packing media shall bear the statement "in _____" or "packed in ______", the blank being filled in with the name of the optional packing medium used, but in lieu of such statement crushed or crisp-cut pineapple canned with pineapple juice and sugar may be labeled "lightly sweetened" or "heavily sweetened" or "extra heavily sweetened" if the drained liquid conforms to the density ranges specified for light syrup, heavy syrup, or extra heavy syrup.
d) When any optional ingredient is used, the label shall bear the words set forth below:
1) "Spiced" or "spice added" or "with added spice" or in lieu of the word "spice" the common name of spice.
2) "Artificial flavoring added" or "with added artificial flavoring" or, in lieu of the word "flavoring", the common name of flavoring.
3) "Seasoned with vinegar" or "seasoned with ______ vinegar", the blank being filled in with the name of vinegar used.
When two or all of the optional seasoning ingredients are used, such words may be combined as for example, "seasoned with vinegar, cloves and cinnamon oil".
e) Whenever the name of the food appears on the label with prominence, so conspicuously and easily understood by ordinary individual under customary conditions of purchase, the name of the optional ingredients used, shall conspicuously precede or follow the name.

3.0 Standard of Quality
The standard of quality for canned pineapple is as follows:
a) In the case of broken slices, not more than 10% of the drained weight may consist of pieces having an arc of less than 90° and not more than 5% of the drained weight of the contents of the container.
1) consists of pieces that measure in thickness less than 8 mm. or more than 25 mm; or
2) consists of pieces that measure less than 18 mm. in width as measured from the outer edge to the inner edge.
b) 1) In the case of cubes or diced pineapple, not more than 10% of the drained weight consists of units of such size.
2) Not more than 15% of the drained weight consists of pieces weighing more than 2.6 Gms.
c) In the case of chunks, not more than 15% of the drained weight consists of pieces weighing less than 5.25 Gms. each.
d) 1) In the case of slices and spears, the drained weight of the largest unit in the container is not more than 1.4 times the weight of the smallest.
2) In the case of half slices, the drained weight of the largest unit in the container is not more than 1.75 times the weight of the smallest (except for an occasional broken pieces due to splitting or an occasional whole slice not quite completely cut through.)
e) In the case of broken slices, not more than 5% of the drained weight of the contents of the can consists of broken slices having an outside diameter differing by as much as 9 mm. from that of those present in greatest proportion by weight.
f) In the case of tidbits, not more than 15% of the drained weight consists of tidbits each of which weighs less than three-fourth as much as the average weight of all the untrimmed tidbits in the container.
g) In the case of slices and half slices, not more than 7½% by count of the units in a container may be excessively trimmed, but in any container having not more than 10 units, one unit may be excessively trimmed, and in any container, having more than 10 units, but not more than 27 units, two units maybe excessively trimmed. Such slices and half slices are excessively trimmed if the portion trimmed away exceeds 5% of the apparent physical bulk of the perfectly formed unit and if such trimming destroys the normal circular shape of the outer or inner edge of the unit.
h) In the case of broken slices and spears, not more than 15% by count of the total units un the container and, in the case of tidbits, not more than 15% of the drained weight, consists of units excessively trimmed. Broken slices, spears, and tidbits are excessively trimmed if the normal shape of these units is destroyed by such trimming.
i) In the case of slices, half slices, broken slices, spears, chucks, cubes, and tidbits, not more than 12½% by count of the units in any container maybe blemished, but in containers having not more than five units, one unit may be blemished; in containers having not more than five units, one unit may be blemished; in containers having more than five units but not more than 10 units, two units may be blemished; and in containers having more than 10 units but not more than 32 units, four units may be blemished. Blemishes include:
1) Any of the following, if in excess of 1.6 mm. in the longest dimension on the exposed surface of the unit; eyes, pieces of shell, brown spots.
2) Deep fruit eyes
3) Bruished portions
4) Other abnormalities that it is possible to detect in good commercial practice before sealing in the containers.
j) In the case of crushed pineapple, not more than 1¼% of the drained weight of the contents of the can consists of fragments bearing such blemishes.
k) In the case of spears, not more than one unit per container is mashed; in the case of slices and half slices, not more than one unit in containers of 25 units or less, and not more than three units in containers of more than 25 units are mashed; in the case of broken slices, not more than 5% by count of the units in the container is mashed; in the case of chunks, not more than three of the units in containers of less than 70 units, or 5% of the units in containers of 70 units or more, is mashed; in the case of tidbits, not more than three of the units in containers of less than 150 units, or 3% of the units in containers of 150 units or more is mashed. (A unit that has lost its normal shape because of ripeness and which bears no mark of mechanical injury shall not be considered as mashed.)
l) In the case of all forms of canned pineapple, not more than 31 Gms. of core is contained in 448 Gms. of drained fruit.
m) In the case of all forms of canned pineapple, not more than 1.35 grams of acid calculated as anhydrous citric acid is contained in 100 milliters of the liquid drained from the product 15 days or more after the pineapple is canned.
n) In the case of crushed pineapple, the drained weight of pineapple is not less than 63% of the net weight of the contents of the container.

3.1 Statement of Substandard Quality
If the quality of canned pineapple falls below the standard of quality, the label shall bear the general statement "Below Standard in Quality". However, if the quality of canned pineapple falls below standard with respect to only one of the factors of quality specified in (3.0) (a) through (n) there may be substituted for the second line of such general statement of substandard quality a new line that such canned pineapple fails to meet, as follows:
a) "Small broken pieces" or "thick broken pieces" as the case maybe.
b) 1) Irregular small pieces
2) Mixed sizes (these words are to be used only where the cubes are of mixed sizes and the tolerance for units larger than maximum size is exceeded).
c) "Irregular small pieces"
d) "Mixed sizes"
e) "Mixed sizes"
f) "Mixed sizes"
g) "Excessively trimmed"
h) "Excessively trimmed"
i) "Blemished" or "contains blemished pieces"
j) "Blemished" or "Contains blemished pieces"
k) "Mashed units" or "Contains mashed units"
l) "Poorly cored" or "Excessive core"
m) "Excessively tart"
n) "Contains excess liquid"

4.0 Fill of Container
The container shall be well filled with fruit and the product shall occupy not less than 90% of the water capacity of the container.

4.1 Label Statement of Substandard Fill
If canned pineapple falls below the standard of fill of container, the label shall bear the statement "Below Standard in Fill".

5.0 Canned crushed pineapple

5.1 Fill of Container
The standard of fill of container for canned crushed pineapple is a fill of not less than 90% of the total capacity of the container.

5.2 Label Statement of Substandard Fill
If canned crushed pineapple falls below the standard of fill of container, the label shall bear the general statement of substandard fill "Below Standard in Fill".

This regulation shall take effect thirty (30) days after publication in the Official Gazette.
</body>

<sign>AMADEO H. CRUZ, M.D., C.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>