DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
MANILA

<date>02/10/1972</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 165 s. 1972</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Instituting the Batch System of Submitting and Processing Family Planning Travelling Expenses Voucher (TEVs) by the Field Personnel in the Program (RHOs, PHOs and RHUs) with slight modificatios of the procedures prescribed under Administrative Order No. 143, s. 1971.</subject>

<body>
As a corollary to Administrative Order No. 143, s. 1971, entitled "Implementation of the Batch System of submitting to and processing of vouchers of claims under the Rural Health Units, the following revised procedures are to be observed but only insofar as and particularly to those field personnel involved in the family planning project of the Department of Health are concerned:

1) Vouchers should be prepared immediately after the completion of each task at the end of every month by the Rural Health Unit personnel concerned, all of which should be submitted to the Provincial Family Planning Medical/ Nursing Coordinator, not later than the 2nd day of the succeeding month.

2) The Family Planning Medical Coordinator shall verify the veracity of the claims and affix his initials under the space provided for the signature of the Provincial Health Officer, and should prepare the list of vouchers to be forwarded to the Provincial Health Officer concerned on the 4th day of the month following.

3) The Provincial Health Office should compile and number chronologically the vouchers from all units in the province after ascertaining that all claims are properly documented and signed, including those claims originating from the Provincial Health Office concerened (the Provincial Health Officers, the FP Medical and Nursing Coordinators). He should accomplish seven (7) legible copies of the " List of Vouchersof Claims" (see Appendix A, attached, for each kind of expenditure, to wit: (1) Travelling Expense Vouchers, (2) Travelling Allowances, (3) Motivators' Pay, (4) Clinic Insentive Pay, etc., to be forwarded with the claims in labelled folders, to the Regional Health Office not later than the 6th day of the month.

4) The Administrative Assistant of the Family Planning Project Office in the Regional Health Office, with the assistance of the FP Clerk should assign consecutive numbers to the batch as they arrive on the top position of all the copies of the "List" before acknowledging receipt on the lower portion of the same promptly send back a copy for its (PHO) file. The Administrative Assistant should preliminary process all vouchers in the batch, and the amount approved for each claims, and forwarded the batch with the original and two (2) copies of ROA to the authorities concerenedfor approal. He should also be responsible for all vouhers until the Accounting Office of the project Office acknowledges receipt thereof.

5) The Accounting Office of the Main Office after filling the receipt portion of the "List" should proceed with the final processing of the vouchers making sure that each claim is properly indexed.

6) The precossed batch, certified with available funds, will be forwarded to the Department Auditor, for pre-auditing.

7) From the Auditor's Office, the pre-audited vouchers listed in the batch should be delivered to the Administrative Office of the Project Office for check preparation. The batch with the claims subject to correction should pass thru the Accounting Office for proper notation and/or adjustments before checks can be drawn for the corrected amount. The original and duplicates of the list together with the paid vouchers and all supporting papers should be submitted to the Accounting Health Office before the close of the office hours on the date the checks are countersigned. Two (2) copies of the list will be sent to the Provincial Health Office with the checks by the Administrative Assistant.

8) The Provincial Health Office should immediately return a copy of the list as an acknowledgement of the receipt of the checks, and the other copy should be posted in the bulletin board for the information of all concerned. The Provincial Health Officer should cause the immediate delivery of the checks to the prospective claimants through the designated field personnel (the Medical and/or Nursing Family Planning Coordinator).

9) The Accounting Office shall enter in he Journal of Checks issued the total amount in the "List" indicating the first and last number of the checks issued, and subsequently post the same on section C of the ROA. Delayed vouchers shall only be accepted upon submission of a written explanation for the delay and shall only be processed when approved in writing by the project Director or his authorized representative, as recommended by the Provincial Health Officer.

Personnel assigned to difficult areas may be allowed to submit their claims after the prescribed date, and direct to the National Comprehensive MCH Family Planning Project Office by presenting a written request for exemption, citing the difficulties encountered, subject to the approval of the Project Director.

Vouchers which are defective due to lack of supporting papers and which are incorrectly prepared shall be detached from the batch and deleted from the "List" of the Provincial Health Office. Vouchers needing correction should be returned and the Provincial Health Office will include the same in the "List" (see Appendix B) of the late and defective claims currently being prepared. The submission of this batch to the Regional Healt Office will be made monthly together with the regular batch. No vouchers shall be withdrawn from the batch, other than for reasons mentioned in the preceding, for the purpose of effecting speedy processing of claims, nor shall checks be released by the Administrative Assistant and/or the Family Planning Clerk to individual claimants other than the Provincial Health Officer or his duly designated liaison officer.

All concerened should be guided accordingly. Anyone of the field personnel concerned and rural health unit personnel failing to comply with these prescribed procedure shall be dealt with administratively.

The attached outline and flow chart will help clarify the details involved in the prescribed procedures.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>(Undersecretary for Health and Medical Services)
Officer In-Charge</signtitle>

Encls: a/s