Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>10/26/1973</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 201 series 1973</docnum>

<subject>REVISED RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE REGISTRATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CLINICAL LABORATORIES IN THE PHILIPPINES.</subject>

<body>
Sec. 1 - Purpose and Title: The "Rules and Regulations" published and enforced pursuant to Section 3 to R. A. No. 4688 approved on June 18, 1966 are hereby revised and shall be known as "REVISED RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE REGISTRATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF CLINICAL LABORATORIES IN THE PHILIPPINES" and promulgated for the purpose of preventing the operation and maintenance of substandard, improperly managed and poorly equipped clinical laboratories.

Sec. 2 Scope: — The regulations embodied herein shall apply to any person, firm or corporation, operating and maintaining clinical laboratories in which any or all of the following: body fluids, tissues, secretions, excretions, and radioactivity from human beings, are analyzed for the determination of the presence of pathogenic organisms, pathologic processes and/or conditions of the person from which they are obtained, provided that government hospital laboratories doing routine or minimum laboratory examinations are exempt if their services are declared as extensions of government regional or central laboratories, and provided further that laboratories being used solely for academic training and/or for purely research activities are likewise not herein covered.

Sec. 3 — Basic License Requirements: - Any person, firm or corporation desiring to establish or operate and maintain a clinical laboratory shall submit to the Secretary of Health, thru the Bureau of Research and Laboratories, a sworn petition/application, said farm prepared and adopted therefor, and containing, among others, the following data: (1) the name, citizenship and domicile of the head of the laboratory: (2) the place, municipality and province where it is to be established; (3) the name of the establishment; (4) the name, citizenship and domicile of the owner; (5) scope and nature of work to be undertaken (see Sec. ll—c); (6) statement that applicant has complied with all business requirements under other existing laws or ordinances, that are necessary in pursuance of the activity for which a license is herein applied for; and (7) a tax clearance for the preceding year. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, it must be duly registered under existing laws, and that a cepy of its registration papers be attached to the corresponding petition. An inspector of the Bureau of-Research and Laboratories shall, upon receipt of said application, inspect within 60 days the establishment and verify if the applicant has complied with the requirements prescribed in these regulations. The license will thenceforth be issued, signed and approved by the Secretary of Health if the application is found to be meritorious; otherwise the same shall be returned without action.

Sec. 4 — License Fees: — A fee of ₱100.00 shall be charged for every license issued to open and operate a clinical laboratory, payable to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories. This license shall be subject to renewal within the last (2) months of each year upon payment of a renewal fee of fifty (P50.00) pesos. A grace period <missingtext> </missingtext>

Sec. 5 — No clinical laboratory is allowed to operate without the proper license from the Secretary of Health, thru the Bureau of Research and Laboratories who are charged with the responsibility of strictly enforcing the provisions of R. A. No. 4688 and the rules as herein promulgated.

Sec. 6 — No person is permitted to manage, administer or supervise a clinical laboratory unless he is a physician, licensed and duly registered with the Board of Medical Examiners of the Republic of the Philippines, qualified in laboratory medicine as stipulated in Section 7 (b), and duly authorized by the Secretary of Health, such authorization to be renewed annually. This authorization shall be exempted from any fees.

Sec. 7 — Definition of Terms:

a. The term "clinical laboratories" shall mean to include any or all of the following: (1) Clinical Pathology, (2) Anatomical Pathology, and (3) Forensic Pathology.

Clinical Pathology includes clinical chemistry, hematology, clinical microscopy, microbiology, serology: immunohematology and blood banking, radioisotope laboratory and laboratory endocrinology.

Anatomical Pathology includes surgical pathology, cytology and post-mortem examinations.

Forensic Pathology includes all medico—legal examinations.

b. " Head ", " Chief ", "Director” or "In-charge" of the Laboratory - The head, chief, director or In—charge of the laboratory should be a duly licensed physician and registered with the Medical Board of Examiners of the Philippines, and qualified in laboratory medicine by having been certified by Philippine Board of Pathology either in Anatomical Pathology, Clinical Pathology or both; provided that in areas where there are no pathologists, the laboratory may be supervised by a licensed physician with training in laboratory medicine as the Director of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories may consider sufficiently adequate depending on the activities performed, and that he is authorized by the Secretary of Health as head or in—charge of such laboratory.

c. Personnel -

1. "Associate Pathologist" — A licensed physician and qualified in laboratory medicine as certified by the Philippine Board of Pathology either in Anatomical Pathology, Clinical Pathology or both who is under the direct supervision of the Head, Chief, Director or In—Charge of a clinical laboratory.

2. "Pathology Assistant" — a duly licensed physician and registered with the Philippine Medical Board of Examiners, with at least one (1) year training in laboratory medicine, and who shall be under the direct! supervision of the head, <missingtext> </missingtext>

3. Medical Technologist — must be a licensed Medical Technologist duly registered in the Board of Examiners for Medical Technology who shall be directly under supervision of a registered pathologist, or a licensed physician authorized by the Secretary of Health as head of the laboratory in places where there are no pathologists.

4. Laboratory Technicians — must have completed at least two years of college work with at least 12 units of laboratory subjects, and one year of training in an accredited laboratory; or without college work but with at least ten years training and experience in a duly approved clinical laboratory. The laboratory technicians will be under the supervision of the medical technologists and under the over—all supervision of the head of the laboratory or his associate or assistant.

5. Laboratory aides - should be atleast high school graduates and who shall assist the medical technologists or laboratory technicians but whose activities should be limited to non—technician procedures.

d. "Equivalents" as used in Section 11 — this refers to equipment, supplies and materials being used in the performance of a laboratory examination which are not the same as those specified but could serve the purpose as well.

Sec. 8 — Interpretations: — Except as specifically authorized by the Secretary of Health in writing, no interpretation of the meaning of the regulations or its part by any office or employee of the office of the Secretary of Health other than a written interpretation by the Secretary of Justice will be recognized to be binding upon the Secretary of Health.

Sec. 9 — Application for license shall be filed by the owner or his duly authorized representatives in a form "Petition to establish, operate and maintain a clinical laboratory" together with the "Information Sheet" to be filled by the physician—in-charge, prepared for the purpose, with the Bureau of Research and Laboratories for the necessary screening and approval. Each petition shall be signed under oath on affirmation by the applicant or a person duly authorized to act for and in his behalf.

Sec. 10 — Terms and ConditiOns of License: — Neither the license shall be assigned or otherwise transfered to an unauthorized party in violation of the provisions of these regulations. Any owner, administrator or manager of any clinical laboratory desiring to transfer the physical location of his registered clinical laboratory to another place should inform in writing the Bureau of Research and Laboratories within 15 days after transfer has been completed. His laboratory in its new location shall be subject to reinspection and should comply with these rules. Any change in ownership or change in head of the laboratory shall likewise be reported within 15 days in writing by the persons concerned to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories for notation and approval, failure to do so will automatically revoke the license of the clinical laboratory.

Sec. 11 — Requirements for a Clinical LaboratOry

However, a clinical laboratory must employ at leat one (1) medical technologist.

A pathologist maybe authorized to manage and supervise and/or be an associate pathologist in not more than four (4) clinical laboratories and/or blood banks continguously located in the particular area. In localities without qualified pathologists, a licensed physician as authorize under Section 7 (b) may head only one (1) clinical laboratory.

B. Physical Plant: -

(l) A clinical laboratory should be situated in a place separate from any commercial or non—medical establishment or residential quarters. It should be housed in a permanent building constructed of strong materials, preferably concrete or semi—concrete, tiled or linoleum finish.

(2) The working space of the clinical laboratory of a hospital must  correlate with the bed capacity and type of hospital it serves as well as the services it offers to support the needs of the medical care of the confined and outpatients of the hospital.

(3) Adequate physical provisions for the safety of the laboratory personnel must be provided for especially considering exposure to contamination to infectious materials and abnoxious gases as well as dangers due to inflammable reagents and fires or radioisotope substances.

(4) If needed, provisions must be made for sleeping quarters separate from laboratory area.

(5) Laboratory space cannot be utilized as bleeding area or reception room for a blood bank.

C. Minimum equipment and apparatusses:

(1) Basic equipment — all clinical laboratories in order to be given a license must at least be provided with the following equipment:

(a) For clinical laboratories-doing only routine examinations of stool, urine, blood, sputum and other body fluids, blood grouping and matching, the following equipment or their equivalents are required:

a. Microscope with oil immersion and substage lamp
b. Centrifuge, Clinical
c. Hemocytometer
d. Hemoglobinometer
e. Urinalysis set
f. Burner
g. Stop Watch
g. Supplies as may be required including glasswares and reagents

(b) If chemistry examination is done, the following equipment or their equivalents are required:

a. Photrometer or Spectrophotometer
<missingtext> </missingtext>

(c) If bacteriological examinations are done, the following equipment or their equivalents are required:

Provisions: Isolation and Identification of anaerobic organisms

a. Autoclave
b. Incubator
c. Hot air oven
d. Centrifuge
e. Microscope
f. waterbath
g. Burner
h. pH Meter of Color Comparator
i. Balance
j. Supplies as may be required including glasswares

(d) If serological examinations are done, the following equipment or their equivalents are required:

a. Waterbath — 56°C & 37°C 
b. Refrigerator
c. Clinical Instrument Sterilizer
d. Centrifuge
e. Interval Timer
f. Supplies as may be required including glasswares
g. VDRL rotator

(e) If pathological examinations are done, the following additional equipment or their equivalents are required:

a. Microtome set
b. Microscope
c. Paraffin Oven
d. Staining Dishes
e. Waterbath
f. Interval Timer
g. Supplies including glasswares, reagents and stains as may be required.

Clinical laboratories that will undertake examinations other than those mentioned above but other than blood banks shall consult with the Bureau of Research and Laboratories which shall prescribe the minimum requirements thereof.

Depending on the nature and scope of the work to be undertaken as grouped below, the pieces of equipment and apparatus needed should be adequate to perform any or all of the following:

(a) Routine tests which include urinalysis, blood count, feces, blood grouping and matching.

(b) Routine blood chemistry which includes sugar, NPN, creatinine, urea, nitrogen, uric acid, cholesterol, bilirubin, serum protein (quantitative) and special hematology.

(c) Special biochemistry and serology which include electrolytes, steroids, enzymes, hormones, Widal, Kahn, Kolmer and VDRL.

(d) Bacteriology which includes smear and cultures of blood, urine, sputum, vaginal and conjunctival sec— <missingtext> </missingtext>

(f) Parasitology which includes protozoal and zoological diagnosis — detection and determination of different species, genus, family and habitat of parasites.

(g) Anatomic pathology which includes gross and microscopic examination of pathologic Specimens and necropsies; preparation of paraffin and frozen sections and pathological specimens and cytology.

(h) Radioisotope examinations including determination of RAI and other isotope compounds, tracing and scanning of body organs, etc.

The permit issued will clearly state the services authorized to operate or if limited service, authorized specific tests allowed will be specified.

Sec. 12 — Reporting: - All laboratory requests shall be Considered as consultations between the requesting physician and the pathologist of the laboratory. As such all laboratory reports on various examinations of human specimens shall be construed as consultations. No person working in an approved clinical laboratory shall issue a report, orally or in writing, whole or portions thereof without the actual signature of the pathologist or his authorized associate or assistants, to the requesting physician or his authorized representative except in emergencies when the results maybe released as authorized by the pathologist.

Sec. 13 — Recording: - An adequate and effective system of recording all requests and reports of all human specimens submitted to and examined in the laboratory should be maintained to include provisions for filing, storage, indexing, cross indexing and accession number in addition to patient's personal and clinical information to prevent erroneous reporting and permit ready identification and retrieving. All requests and reports in clinical laboratory shall be kept on file for at least one year provided a duplicate copy is on file in the patient's medical records. Records of anatomic and forensis pathology should be kept permanently in the laboratory.

Sec. 14 — Laboratory Fees: — The rate of laboratory fees to be charged by clinical laboratory for examination shall be within the range of the usual fees prevailing at the time and particular place taking into consideration costs of production and quality control of various laboratory procedures. Professional services rendered to the patient in the performance of special procedure of examination shall be treated separately and not included in the laboratory fee.

Sec. 15 — Publicity: Publicity of approved laboratory should be within the moral, ethical and professional concepts of acceptable medical practice. Only the name of the laboratory, address, telephone number of the laboratory, pathologist and assistants and field of work covered by the licensure shall appear on letterhead and other information media. Advertising matter should be directed exclusively to physicians through recognized professional bulletins or medical journals. No laboratory shall make advertisement on medical fad, fictitious and unproven claims, misleading statements and to advocate directly or by any means of substerfuge unrealiable and inconclusive laboratory procedures which may prove detrimental to patient care.

Sec. 16 - Exhibition of Certificate of Approval and License <missingtext> </missingtext>

Sec. 17 — Expiration: — Each specific license shall expire on the last day of December of the year stated therein, including the authorization given to the Head, director, or physician-in-charge of the clinical laboratory.

Sec. 18 - Renewal: — Applications for renewal of license shall be filed in accordance with the preceding Sections 3 and 4. The Bureau of Research and Laboratories shall process applications for license renewal immediately upon receipt thereof, provided however that such clinical laboratories may continue operation (hring the pendancy of the final action on their applications, unless otherwise advised or ordered by the Secretary of Health to cease operation.

Sec. 19 — Inspection: — It shall be the duty of the Secretary of Health or his representative to conduct periodical inspection of clinical laboratories.

(1) Each licensee shall give the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative/s the opportunity at all reasonable time to inspect the premises and facilities of the clinical laboratory.

(2) Each license shall make available all records kept by him pursuant to these regulations for inspection by the Secretary of Health or his authorized representative/s.
(3) Directors of Regional Health Office, Provincial, City or Municipal Health Officers are required to report the existence of unlicensed clinical laboratories and/or violations of these rules to the Bureau of Research and Laboratories.

Sec. 20 a Quality Control Tests: The Director of the Bureau of Research and Laboratories or his representative is hereby authorized to conduct such quality control tests as he deems appropriate or necessary for the administration of these regulations and for the control of operation.

Sec. 21 — Modification and Revocation of Licenses: The terms and conditions of each license shall be subject to amendment or modification by means of amendments to these regulations as the Secretary of Health may deem fit to suit. Any license may be revoked, suspended or modified in full or in part for any material false statement in the application as revealed by the statement of the applicant, or as shown by the record of inspection which will serve as basis for the Secretary of Health to refuse issuance of license on an original application or for a violation of, or failure to observe any of the terms and provisions of these regulations. Except in cases of willful, or repeated violations hereof, or where public health interest or safety requires otherwise, no license shall be modified, suspended or revoked unless prior notice has been made and the corresponding investigation conducted.

Sec. 22 — Investigation of Charges or Complaint: Upon the filing of a complaint or charges duly sworn by any person, interested party or corporation, against a clinical laboratory or any of its personnel to the effect that the one or more of such personnel of an approved laboratory have violated or are violating R. A. No. 4688 or the provisions of these regulations, the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative/s shall investigate the complaint or charge and verify if the laboratory concerned or any of its personnel is guilty <missingtext> </missingtext>

judicial authorities for criminal action.

Sec. 23 — Violation: — Any person who violates any provisions of these rules and regulations shall be punished with an imprisonment for not less than one month but not-more than one year or a fine of not less than ₱1,000.00 or more than ₱5,000.00 or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Provided, however, that if the offender is a firm or corporation, the managing head and/or owner(s) thereof shall be liable to the penalty imposed herein.

Sec. 24 — Effectivity: These rules and regulations shall take effect upon approval and publication as required.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>