Republika ng Pilipinas
KAGAWARAN NG KALUSUGAN
TANGGAPAN NG KALIHIM
MAYNILA

<date>10/22/1973</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 198 s. 1973</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT : Adoption of temporary administrative measures to ensure continuous payment of salaries and claims of field personnel.</subject>

<body>
The current advices of allotments released by the Budget Commission bear many changes which affect the operations of the Bureaus and Regional Health Offices. Such changes create some problems which would require the adoption of temporary measures to avoid delays in the payment of salaries and other claims of field personnel.

I. Payment of salaries up to October 31, 1973.

1. The Regional Health Offices shall continue as usual the payment of salaries to all the employees whom they have attended to since July 1, 1973;

2. The Food and Drug Administration and the Bureau of Dental Health Services shall continue to pay the salaries of their respective field personnel.

II. Payment of salaries from November 1, 1973.

1. All Regional Health Offices, except Regions Nos. 3, 8 and 10, shall assume to pay regularly those personnel whose salaries are provided for in their respective advices of allotments, including the field personnel of the Bureau of Dental Health Services and the Food and Drug Administration;

2. The Bureau of Dental Health Services and the Food and Drug Administrations shall immediately discontinue paying the salaries of their field personnel;

3. The Office of the Secretary shall handle the payment of salaries of all personnel under Regional Health Offices Nos. 3, 8 and 10. Payrolls for employees of these regions must be submitted within ten (10) days from the start of each month.

III. Payment of reimbursement claims of field personnel.

1. All Regional Health Offices except for Regions Nos. 3, 8 and 10 shall continue to pay regularly the reimbursement claims of their field employees;

2. All pending reimbursement claims of field personnel under Regional Health Offices Nos. 3, 8 and 10 covering the period from July 1, 1973 shall be referred to the Office of the Secretary for payment;

3. The Bureau of Dental Health Services and the Food and Drug Administration shall immediately stop all payments of reimbursement claims of their personnel. All unsettled or pending claims covering the period from July 1, 1973 shall be referred to the Regional Health Offices concerned except claims to Regional Health Offices Nos. 3, 8 and 10, which shall be referred to the Office of the Secretary.

IV. Settlement of payments made from July 1, 1973

1. All Regional Health Offices that assumed the payments of salaries, reimbursement claims and the cost of supplies and materials for the personnel under Regional Health Offices Nos. 3, 8 and 10 covering the period from July 1, 1973 shall prepare the bills and submit them to the Office of the Secretary for settlement;

2. In the same manner, all payments made by the Bureau of Dental Health Services and the Food and Drug Administration to their field personnel from July 1, 1973 shall be billed accordingly against the Regional Health Offices concerned or to the Office of the Secretary in case of payments made for Regional Health Office Nos. 3, 8 and 10.

V. Handling of the accounts of the Regional Health Offices Nos. 3, 8 and 10.

1. The Acting Chief of the Financial and Management Services shall immediately initiate and undertake al administrative actions necessary to establish the following:

(a) To open and maintain separate books of accounts for each region and to form and organize the unit to handle the activity;

(b) To open and maintain separate checking accounts for each region and to form and organize the unit to handle the activity;

2. The Acting Chief of the Financial and Management Service shall also initiate action to recommend the temporary reassignment of clerical staff to cope with the expected increase in the volume of clerical work.

VI. Submission of Payroll deductions date.

1. The Regional Health Offices concerned shall prepare and submit to the Office of the Secretary the payrolldeductions data of field personnel whose salaries shall be charged against the allotments of Regional Health Offices Nos. 3, 8 and 10.

2. The Bureau of Dental Health Services and the Food and Drug Administration shall also prepare and submit the payroll deductions data of their field personnel to the Regional Health Directors concerned or to the Office of the Secretary for those falling under the jurisdiction of Regional Health Offices Nos. 3, 8 and 10.

VII. The Acting Chief of the Financial and Management Service shall field members of his staff from time to time to provide guidance and assistance to the Regional Health Offices in the implementation of this Order.

VIII. All queries or requests for clarification of the provisions of this Order shall be referred to the Acting Chief of the Financial and Management Service.

IX. This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>