Republika ng Pilipinas
KAGAWARAN NG KALUSUGAN
TANGGAPAN NG KALIHIM
MAYNILA

<date>08/04/1975</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 252 s. 1975</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Students of Schools and Colleges of Social Work with Government Hospitals under the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
The Department of Health aims to provide comprehensive medical and health services to the people as it recognizes and believes in a basic principle of World Health Organization that "Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-eing and not merely the absence of disease of infirmity." Hence, social service in hospital or health setting developed as a specialized service to take care of the more subtle but equally importany aspects, the social aspects of disease prevention, medical/health care, treatment and rehabilitation. Aware of the fact, however, that this particular service requires adequately trained medical social workers, the Department of Health by virtue of Section 17 of Presidential Decree No. 733, hereby authorizes designated teaching and training hospitals to accept social work student affiliates for the desired medical social work experience, provided the following rules and regulations are complied with:

A. Responsibilities of the Hospitals:

Hospitals authorized by the Secretary of Health to accept social work student affiliates must meet these requirements:

1. Must be a teaching and training hospital with at least 150 beds capacity duly licensed by the Bureau of Health and Medical Services.

2. Must have a well organized and administered Medical Social Service headed by a registered and qualified Social Worker with at least 21 units graduate studies from a duly accredited school and supervised fieldwork experience of at least 300 case hours from a recognized social/health agency.

3. Must have adequate office space and facilities which assures privacy for interviews, case recording, and filing.

4. Shall accept each number of students for a specified period in proper proportion to the number of qualified staff which shall be three students to every one medical social worker (3:1) and, to the number of cases, which shall be a ratio of one social work student to every five in-patients (1:5) and/or one social work student to every ten out-patients (1:10).

5. Must provide a well-equipped ward conference room for the holding of regular groupwork sessions with patients, watchers, and/or family members.

6. Provide a well-equipped conference room for the holding of joint conferences with the staff of the hospitals and school/college of social work for the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the training program.

7. Promote cooperation and harmonious working relationship through the leadership of the Head of Medical Social Service and her staff. Hold periodic dialogues between the medical social service and training staff (medical and nursing) and the social work education groups in order to entertain suggestions and thresh out problems arising from the social work affiliation program for the benefits of the patients and students.

8. The hospital authorities reserve the right to recommend to the Secretary of Health the discontinuance or withdrawal of affiliation privileges of any school when, in its judgment, the school authorities or their respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation or violated these rules and regulations or the students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the patients.

9. Semi-annual reports on the affiliation fees received showing the percentage for each category of the personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Secretary of Health. A narrative report on the status and/or problems of the affiliation program must also be submitted to the Secretary of Health.

B. Responsibilities of the Affiliating Schools:

1. All colleges and schools of social work must be recognized and duly accredited by the authorities of the Department of Education and Culture and the Board of Examiners for Social Workers before applying for the affiliation of its social students in a teaching and training hospital of the Department of Health.

2. Must meet the minimum standard requirements for social work education and training set by an Accreditation Committee of the Schools of Social Work Association of the Philippines.

3. Shall provide qualified social work instructors and field work coordinator to guide, teach, supervise, and evaluate students' performance at the ratio of one (1) instructor to every three (3) social work students. New instructors must be sent to the Office of the Medical Social Work Adviser of the Department of Health and the Hospital for orientation for two weeks before placement of the students to the hospital.

4. Shall send students who are in good health as certified by a government physician.

5. Shall send students who are on their senior year or who are on their graduate studies.

6. Shall send only those students with intellectual maturity and emotional stability.

7. Shall pay or place damages, breakages or losses by the faculty and students of hospital property, equipment and supplies.

8. Shall arrange the class schedule of the student affiliates to be able to comply with a minimum weekly hours schedule of twenty-four hours (24 hours).

9. Shall pay the hospital within the first five days each month, ten pesos (₱10.00) for each student as monthly affiliation fee.

10. Shall see to it that the instructors and students observe and comply with the policies, rules and regulations of the hospital and that professional discipline is maintained at all times.

11. Shall provide the office supplies such as bond paper, ball pen, etc. needed by the students.

12. The head/dean of the school and faculty concerned shall meet at least twice during each semester period with the Medical Social Work Adviser of the Department of Health and the Chief of Ancillary Services/Head of Medical Social Service of the hospital to jointly plan and thresh out problems with regard to the affiliation program.

C. Special Provisions:

1. All government schools or colleges of Social Work like the University of the Philippines, Institute of Social Work and Community Development affiliating with the teaching and training hospitals of the Department of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affilation fee.

D. Effectivity:

This administrative order supersedes all previous orders on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>