Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>01/27/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 274 s. 1976</docnum>

TO: The Regional Health Directors, Chief of Agencies, and Training and Teaching Hospitals.

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Medical Technology Schools, Colleges and Universities in Government Hospitals under the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
Health laboratory services of the Department of Health have been established primarily to give adequate laboratory support to the clinicians in the diagnosis and therapy of patients and to help detect pathologic changes prior to its manifest signs and symptoms. However, it has long been aware that while accomplishing this primary objective, it plays an important role in the training of medical technology interns. A balance must be had at all times so that service and training can go hand in hand effectively. In line therefore with the policies of fully maximizing the effectivity of laboratory services, of upgrading the training of medical technology interns and of properly utilizing the medical technology interns during training, the Department of Health hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with in the affiliation of medical technology interns in the Department of Health laboratories:

I. Responsibilities of the Department of Health Laboratories

Laboratories designated by the Secretary of Health where medical technology interns may affiliate to obtain the necessary skills and knowledge in clinical laboratory practice must meet the following requirements:

1. The laboratory should be duly licensed as specified by the law on clinical laboratories, R.A. 4688.

2. The position of medical technologist should be provided for each of the sections of clinical chemistry, clinical microscopy (urinalysis and parasitology), microbiology (bacteriology), hematology, blood banking and serology and histopathology.

3. There should be an adequate laboratory space to accomodate both the staff and the medical technology interns.

4. There should be sufficient equipment and supplies necessary depending on the volume and type of examinations as well as the number of interns to be trained by the laboratory.

5. Each section of the laboratory can be utilized for training only if it can accomodate at least 2 interns at any one time.

6. The laboratory should have a training program for medical technology interns.

a. The person responsible for this program should be a member of the specialty society in laboratory medicine.
b. The training program should be prepared in coordination with the training officer of the hospital or health region and submitted to the Committee on Affiliation with the contract of affiliation.
c. The program should provide for an objective measure or evaluation of the baseline skills and knowledge prior to allowing or utilizing interns to handle actual specimens from patients.
d. The program should include the (1) objective of training, (2) methods or procedures to be taught, (3) principles that go with the methods, (4) right work attitudes and ethical values, (5) required quota of tests to be performed to develop accuracy and precision, (6) objective evaluation of performance in each section, (7) time schedule, (8) lectures, seminars and conferences and (9) methodology of training.

7. The minimum number of examinations or samples of each section to accomodate interns are as follows:

a. Clinical Chemistry - 3000 exam./annum
b. Clinical Microscopy

1. Urinalysis (complete analysis) - 1500 samples/annum
2. Parasitology (direct fecal smear and concentration test or Kato thick smear) - 1500 samples/annum

c. Microbiology

1. Gram-staining, acid fast staining - 800 samples/annum
2. Isolation and identification of organisms - 1000 samples/annum

d. Hematology

1. Peripheral blood study to include hemoglobin, white cell count, Schilling, hematocrit and red cell morphology or CBC - 1200 samples/annum
2. Sedimentation rate, platelet count, bleeding and clotting time, malarial smears and other tests - 800 samples/annum

e. Blood Banking and Serology

1. Typing - 900 tests/annum
2. Complete cross-matching - 600 tests/annum
3. Serology

VDRL - 300 tests/annum
Widal test 300 tests/annum

f. Histopathology - 500 tissues/annum
Cytology - 500 tissues/annum

For each additional intern, another half of the requirement shall be added.

8. At least one member of the professional staff of the laboratory to every group of interns not exceeding 10 in each section should be provided.

9. The staff and personnel of the laboratory will be assisted by a laboratory instructor experienced in actual laboratory work from the sending University or College to assist especially to monitor individual attendance, behavior, performance of the students including guidance in readings and application of the theoretical knowledge taken up in school to actual practice.

10. No more than 10 medical technology interns shall be allowed to train during the night shift in understaffed hospitals and so certified by the director of the same, such interns should have a medical technologist to work with them. No intern is to be assigned without the regular professional staff of the laboratory on duty at the same time.

11. The allotment derived from the intern's affiliation fee for the laboratory must be spent for the laboratory needs utilized exclusively for training and not for payment of furnitures or appliances of the laboratory.

12. The Director of the hospital is responsible for the admission of the number of interns approved by the Committee. He should not enter into any contract of affiliation with any college, university or school for medical technology if any of the conditions set forth in this Administrative Order are not complied with.

13. Priority should be given to interns residing within the area or region of the hospital.

Quarterly reports on the affiliation fees received showing the percentage of each category of personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Secretary of Health thru the Accreditation Committee together with the narrative report on the status and/or problems of the Affiliation Program.

II. Responsibilities of the Affiliating Universities/Schools/Colleges of Medical Technology

All universities, schools, colleges of Medical Technology must have met the following requirements before applying for affiliation to any clinical laboratory of the Department of Health:

a. Approval from the Department of Education and the Board of Medical Technology.
b. Compliance with the provisions of R.A. 5527 and Presidential Decree No. 498.

These universities, schools and colleges shall:

1. Provide a laboratory instructor experienced in actual laboratory work to monitor individual attendance, behavior and performance of the students including guidance in readings and application of theoretical knowledge obtained from school to actual practice and to assist the pathologist and professional staff in implementing the approved training program for the duration of the training of the interns.

2. Pay or replace damage, breakages or losses by the medical technology interns of laboratory property, equipment and supplies.

3. See to it that all medical technology interns before beginning the internship in any section must have completed the theoretical aspect of that particular section.

4. Pay the hospital thirty five pesos (₱35.00) for each intern each month. Payment is done within the first five days of the month.

5. Make a request for affiliation to the Chief of Hospital accomplishing the appropriate standard form of contract of affiliation (6 copies) and coursed through proper channels to the Secretary of Health, through the Chairman, Accreditation Committee on Training and Student Affiliation. Contracts shall be subject for renewal every school year by the Chief of Hospital.

6. See to it that the laboratory instructor and students observe and abide with the policies, rules and regulations of the hospital and that discipline is maintained at all times.

7. See to it that the students and instructor are in their proper uniforms and provided with a laboratory gown.

III. Joint Responsibilities of Affiliating Universities, Schools and Colleges of Medical Technology and the Laboratories

1. The training program shall be prepared by the pathologist-in-charge of the laboratory in coordination with the training officer of the hospital. Its implementation shall be the joint responsibility of the pathologist, staff and personnel of the laboratory and the laboratory instructor of each university, school or college assigned to the laboratory for the duration of the internship of their respective students.

2. The internship schedule shall be properly apportioned to the different sections of the laboratory service as follows:

a. Clinical Chemistry - 2 1/2 months
b. Clinical Microscopy (urinalysis and parasitology) - 3 months
c. Microbiology (bacteriology) - 2 1/2 months
d. Hematology - 2 months
e. Blood Banking and Serology - 1 month
f. Histopathology - 1 month

Under no circumstances is the duration of internship in any section be prolonged or shortened.

3. A monthly conference should be held to evaluate the implementation of the program and institution of changes by the pathologist, laboratory instructor and staff of the laboratory and for problems that might arise during the implementation.

4. Maintenance of cooperation and harmonious working relations at all times among the students and staff of the hospital.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>