Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>09/22/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 299 s. 1976</docnum>

TO: Regional Health Directors, Acting Regional Health Directors and Officers-in-Charge of Regional Health Offices duly designated by the Secretary of Health.

<subject>SUBJECT: Further delegation of authority governing certain personnel matters pursuant to Letter of Instructions No. 448 in addition to those previously delegated under Administrative Orders Nos. 287 and 292, both current series, and corresponding guidelines for action thereon.</subject>

<body>
SEC. 1. In accordance with Letter of Instructions No. 448 dated August 18, 1976, strengthening the administrative capacity for regional operations, and in furtherance of the policy of government decentralization as embodied in the Integrated Reorganization Plan (IRP), the following further delegations of authority governing certain personnel matters in addition to those previously delegated under Administrative Orders Nos. 287 and 292, both current series, are hereby granted to Regional Health Directors/Acting Regional Health Directors/Officers-in-Charge of Regional Health Offices duly designated by the Secretary of Health, together with the corresponding guidelines for taking action on such matters:

A. On Appointments:

a. To exercise appointing authority over -

(1) Original and promotional appointments and reinstatement to positions of the first level which include clerical, trade, crafts, and custodial service positions and which involve non-professional or sub-professional work in a non-supervisory or supervisory capacity from R-35 to R-50 (alphabetical list of positions from R-35 to R-50 in the first level attached.)

(2) Casual appointments.

b. Consistent with the provisions of the New Constitution and the Rules on Personnel Actions and Policies implementing P.D. 807, otherwise known as the Civil Service Decree of the Philippines, and subject to the general provisions in Letter of Instructions No. 448, the following guidelines shall be observed on the appointments of personnel -

(1) For original appointments to first level positions up to R-50, only qualified applicants with appropriate civil service eligibility for the position involved shall be considered with preference for those who are from localities within the regional area; provided, that for original appointments to permanent items in the same level not requiring any civil service eligibility, selection shall be made according to merit and fitness preferably from the qualified casual employees. For this purpose, the assistance of the Civil Service Commission Regional Office or the provincial treasurer concerned shall be availed of.

(2) For promotional appointments to the above-mentioned first level positions, the officials/employees in the regional area who occupy positions deemed to be next-in-rank to the vacancy shall be considered for promotion with preference for the official/employee in the office/hospital where the vacancy for promotion actually exists; provided, that such official/employee holds a next-in-rank position, is competent and qualified, possesses an appropriate civil service eligibility, and meets the other conditions for promotion.

(3) No one whose performance rating falls within the borderline of least satisfactory (16 - 21.5) shall be considered for promotion. The corresponding total point score should be indicated on the face of the appointment after the adjective performance rating (e.g. Satisfactory - 28.5).

(4) No person shall be reinstated to his former position or to a similar vacant position if there is in the service a competent and qualified next-in-rank with appropriate eligibility who should be promoted thereto.

(5) The certifications on appointments for the required supporting papers in pursuance of Civil Service MC No. 5, series of 1974, shall be signed by the Regional Administrative Officer or Personnel Officer concerned.

(6) Certification Form No. 203 of the Civil Service Commission shall be signed by the Regional Health Director or the Regional Administrative Officer. However, in case of the appointments of hospital personnel, CSC Form No. 203 shall be signed by the Chief of Hospital or the Hospital Administrative Officer concerned.

(7) The word "allowance" (or "allowances") shall not be carried in appointments of hospital personnel who are entitled to subsistence, quarters and/or laundry.

(8) Political, religious, and other similar considerations shall be entirely disregarded in the selection of proposed appointees, either for original appointment or for promotions to first level positions, and those who resort to such influences shall be barred from such appointment or promotion.

(9) The Regional/Acting Regional Health Directors and Officers-in-Charge duly designated by the Secretary of Health, whose regional health offices are provided with lump sum appropriations for the hiring of temporary casual employees shall appoint daily-wage employees whose wages shall be chargeable against their respective funds, as well as daily-wage employees of all other offices with lump sum appropriations, such as hospitals (except training Hospitals directly under the Office of the Secretary of Health) under their respective regional jurisdiction, provided that there is attached to the appointment a certification that funds are available for the purpose.

B. On Transfers of Personnel:

a. To approve transfers of personnel within the jurisdiction of the regional offices: Provided, That in cases of inter-regional transfers which shall be made by higher authorities, the same shall be done in consultation with the regional directors concerned:

(1) No transfer shall be effected without the personel's written request for permission therefor, duly approved by the proper authority and supported by clearance from all money and property accountabilities in the regional office and a certification to the effect that the official or employee has no pending administrative or criminal case.

(2) No transfer shall involve reduction in rank, level, status or salary unless with the written acquiescence of the personnel concerned.

C. On Benefits Under Sec. 699 of the RAC:

a. To approve claims for benefits under Sec. 699 of the Revised Administrative Code, subject to the availability of funds. For this purpose, the Director/Acting Director/Officer-in-Charge of the regional health office shall create and organize a Regional Physical Examination Committee to study and determine the compensability of claims.

(1) Recipients of benefirs claimed and granted under Sec. 699 of the Revised Administrative Code shall no longer be entitled to claim for similar benefits under the Employee's Compensation Commission, effective January 1, 1975.

(2) Likewise, beneficiaries under the ECC shall no longer be entitled to benefits granted under Sec. 699 of the RAC, effective January 1, 1975.

D. On Permission to Exercise a Profession or Engage in Business Outside of Office Hours:

a. To approve applications of personnel for permission to exercise a profession or engage in business outside of office hours.

The conditions to exercise a profession or engage in business outside of office hours are:

(1) That not more than two (2) hours a day shall be devoted to outside practice;
(2) That the time to be spent for private practice shall be strictly outside office hours;
(3) That it shall not in any way interfere with his or her official duties and thus interfere with the efficiency of the service;
(4) That this permission shall be cancelled if found prejudicial to public service; and
(5) That no government property, supplies and/or equipment shall be used in connection therewith.

SEC. 2. Nothing in this delegation shall be construed as limiting the authority of the Secretary of Health to overrule or revoke any appointment issued, or any transfer/claim/application for permission approved, by the Regional/Acting Regionl Health Director/Officer-in-Charge of regional health offices duly designated by the Secretary of Health, which does not conform with the national or department policies relative thereto.

SEC. 3. Actions taken by the official concerned on the above personnel matters shall invariably carry the words "By authority of the Secretary of Health" which shall appear over the signature of the signing official.

SEC. 4. A monthly report of the actions taken on these personnel matters shall be submitted to the Department for review, together with certified true copies of appointments acted upon and other pertinent papers approved.

SEC. 5. All previous issuances inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded.

SEC. 6. This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>