Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>03/11/1976</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 282 s. 1976</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in costing hospital services rendered to patients in government hospitals under the Department of Health.</subject>

<body>
I. Objective:

This Order supplements Administrative Order No. 8 dated April 15, 1966 in consonance with the provisions of Budget Memorandum Circular 22 dated November 1, 1958 to further improve the costing system and to introduce new forms for subsidiary records with the end in view of costing hospital services rendered to all patients, and to attain the following objectives:

1. To keep the patients and the public aware of the amount spent by the government for their medical and health care;
2. To serve as a basis in costing the services rendered by the different units of the hospital;
3. To determine the output in terms of pesos and to evaluate the effectiveness of each unit;
4. To serve as guide in the preparation of the annual budget; and
5. To guide economic planners of the government in programming the activities of the department.

II. Operating Procedure:

Attending physician accomplishes a Doctor's Order (Form No. 1) for a patient needing confinement. The Admitting Section informs the patient of the rates of beds available. The Admitting Section prepares Patients Data Sheet (Form No. 2) and Patients Identification Card (Form No. 2-A). Patient Data Sheet will be prepared in three copies to be distributed as follows:

1 - copy for the Billing Section
1 - copy for the Nursing Station
1 - copy remains in Admitting Section and forwarded to the Medical Records Library after discharge of patient

The Billing Section, upon receipt of the Patient Data Sheet and Patient Identification Card will open a Patient Ledger Card (Form No. 3) and assign a Patient Jacket (Form No. 4).

Services are rendered to the patient only upon doctor's orders as registered in the Patient Chart. An order is relayed to the service unit or ancillary department through Request Slip (Form No. 5). Request Slips are accomplished in two copies:

1 - copy (Original) to be forwarded to the ancillary department concerned
1 - copy (duplicate) to be retained in nurse station file

The ancillary department, based on the request slip will prepare charge slips (Form No. 6-13) in three copies to be distributed as follows:

2 copies - Original and duplicate to accompany the Income Proof Sheet to be forwarded to the Billing Section.
1 copy - file of the service unit

The different ancillary departments will charge the patient for the amount of service rendered by their respective departments, in accordance with the rates prescribed by the Department. They will summarize the income for the day on the basis of the charge slips issued. The cut-off time is 4:00 P.M.; all charge slips issued after 4:00 P.M. will be included in the report to be made in the succeeding day. The income is summarized in the Income Proof Sheet (Form No. 14) in duplicate to be distributed as follows:

Original copy - to the Billing Section together with the original and duplicate copies of the charge slips.
Duplicate copy - file of the service unit

For drugs and medicine to be taken from the hospital pharmacy, Prescription Form (Form No. 15) is prepared in two copies. It will be prepared by the doctor himself to be forwarded to the pharmacy by the nurse on duty.

The pharmacist will fill the order, cost the item and prepare charge slips. The Pharmacy Income Proof Sheet (Form No. 14-A) to be prepared by the Pharmacy will be in three copies.

Original copy - to the Billing Section
Duplicate copy - to accompany the Supply Adjustment Sheet in lieu of the Requisition and Issue Voucher
Triplicate - file of the pharmacy

The Billing Section, upon receipt of the Income Proof Sheet, supported by charge slips, from the different services (ancillary departments) will post the charges appearing therein to the individual patient ledger cards. The original charge slips will be inserted in the patient jacket. The Billing Section will prepare Daily Income Report (Form No. 16) to summarize the income of all the service departments based on the income proof sheets submitted by them. This will be filed chronologically and summarized to tally with the total income realized for the month.

When the patient is about to be discharged, the nursing station will prepare Discharge Notice and Clearance (Form No. 17) in two copies. The Billing Section, upon receipt of the Discharge Notice and Clearance will forward the clearance slip to the different units, make final billing for room and board and post all pending charge slips; prepare statement of account of patient (Bill of Patient-Form No. 30); send original bill with patient jacket to the collecting officer and one copy to the Accounting Unit for entry in the Journal of Bills Rendered. If confinement extends beyond the month, the following procedures shall be observed in billing:

1. Prepare the bill to cover the duration of the confinement from the date of admission to end of the month.
2. Prepare another bill for the duration of the confinement from the start of succeeding month to date of discharge.

The purpose is to record income on the month they are earned.

A. Miscellaneous Items:

1. Transfer from one ward or room to another may be requested through the Transfer Request and Notice (Form No. 18). This shall be accomplished by the nurse in the ward in duplicate to be forwarded to the Admitting Section for approval. The word "APPROVED" is stamped thereon if transfer is feasible. The Admitting Section shall forward the approved Transfer Request and Notice to the nurse to effect the transfer as requested. Transfer Request and Notice are to be distributed as follows:

1 copy - for the billing section to inform them of the change in rate to be billed for room and board.
1 copy - for the Admitting Section

2. Deposits shall be requested from patients upon admission as the Patient Data Sheet is prepared. Admitting Section shall prepare the Deposit Request (Form No. 19). Deposits will be posted immediately to the Patient Ledger Card based on the Request for Deposit as validated by the Collecting Officer/Cashier.

3. Oxygen, gauze bandages, etc., may be requisitioned in Form No. 20 and 21 for the Property Section and Central Supply Rooms, respectively. Upon receipt of the requisition, the Property Section or Central Supply Room ill issue charge slips to cost the items issued. Miscellaneous Charge Slips (Form No. 13) may be used for the purpose.

4. Requisition for linen shall be made in Form No. 22, addressed to the Linen Section. Charge Slips will be used to cost the services rendered. Linen Section may use the "Miscellaneous Charge Slips" (Form No. 13).

5. Replacement Slips (Form No. 23) will be prepared by the nurse in the ward to replenish the stock maintained in the ward for supplies used at night shift when the pharmacy is not open to render service. Replacement slips shall be supported by the request slips or prescription issued each patient. Pharmacist will cost the items used by the patient in the ward by preparing charge slips to account for replenished items.

6. Charge Slip for professional service (Form No. 24) shall be prepared for every visit made by the physician to patient. This will be forwarded to the Billing Section for inclusion in the bill to be rendered to patient.

7. Request for additional bed, etc., for the use of watchers: Request for watchers need the approval of the attending physician. If approved and extra bed or extra facilities will be needed by the watcher, the billing section must be properly informed. Form No. 25 will be used to request extra facilities.

8. Dietary Service shall be informed of new admissions made for the day thru Form No. 29. For every Special Dietary requirement of the patient, Form No. 29-A will be needed. This shall be used by the Dietary Service in preparing charge slips.

B. Use of Credit Memorandum:

If upon admission, the patient does not have the capacity to shoulder the cost of hospitalization, Admitting Section shall refer him to the Social Worker thru Referral Slip (Form No. 26) for interview. Service rendered to out-patient classified as indigent.

The Billing Section will not prepare a bill for charge slips issued to patient in the out-patient department. Billing Section will summarize the charge slips served to patients from Out-Patient Department for the day to be submitted to the Accounting Division. The Accounting Division will prepare a journal voucher to account for the service rendered by the ancillary department to those patients.

D. Patient's Identification Card (Form No. 2-A) will be issued to every patient who come to the hospital for consultation or for confinement. The ID number shall be the same number indicated in the Patient Data Sheet. This numner will be used to code all papers relative to his case for future reference.

E. Subsidiary Ledger for each service department:

Subsidiary Ledger for each service department will be maintained by the Accounting Unit to account for the income reported by each of them. This will guide all concerned on the output of the service for the day, for the month or for the year. Credit memo issued for income of the different service units will likewise be posted based on the summary of the credit memo issued.

This order modifies all standing orders issued regarding costing system of hospital services rendered and any instruction or directive inconsistent with any of the provisions herewith are considered rescinded.

Any unit which desires to follow procedures other than those provided in this order for one reason or another may submit their request for approval by this Office.

This order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>