Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>11/13/1978</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 14, s. 1978</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations and Standard Requirements governing the Registration and Licensure of Dental Prosthetic Laboratories in the Philippines</subject>

<body>
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 1542, the following rules and regulations and standard requirements are hereby prescribed governing the registration and licensure of all dental prosthetic laboratories in the Philippines:

Section 1. Title and Purpose. - The rules and regulations shall be known as "Rules and Regulations and Standard Requirements governing the Registration and Licensure of Dental Prosthetic Laboratories in the Philippines" and promulgated for the purpose of regulating and controlling the establishment and operations of Dental Prosthetic Laboratories with the aim of protecting the health of the public.

Section 2. Scope. — The rules and regulations and standard requirements embodied herein shall apply to any person, firm or corporation operating and maintaining Dental Prosthetic Laboratories.

Section 3. Definition of Terms. - 

a) Prosthetic — the replacement of an absent part of the human body by an artificial part.

b) Dental Prosthetics - an artificial replacement of one or more teeth and/or associated structures which can either be removable or fixed.

c) Dental Prosthetic Laboratory Technician — a person who performs any type of dental prosthetic procedures upon the prescription and supervision of a duly licensed dentist not requiring the presence of the patient.

d) Operator or Chief Technician - Refers to the person who manages in the laboratory and provides technical supervision over all the dental restoration work as to its appropriateness and efficiency. He is either a qualified dentist or a graduate of an accredited school in Dental Technicians Course and duly licensed by the Ministry of Health.

e) Dental Prosthetic Laboratory - any person or part of a dental clinic or establishment engaged in the construction of dental prosthetics.

Section 4. Registration and Licensure of Dental Prosthetic Laboratories. —

a) Pursuant to Section 3, paragraph 2 of Presidential Decree No. 1542, existing private and government dental prosthetic laboratories shall be registered in the Ministry of Health thru the Bureau of Dental Health Services on the prescribed forms (BDHS Forms 3, 3—A & 3-B) within six months from the effectivity of said Decree;

b) The license for their continued operation shall be issued by the Minister of Health after satisfactory proof that the minimum standard requirements for dental prosthetic laboratories are met and the rules and regulations as prescribed herein are complied with.

c) Subsequently, any person desiring to establish or operate a dental prosthetic laboratory shall register with the Minister of Health thru the Bureau of Dental Health Services on the prescribed forms. (BDHS Forms 3, 3-A & 3—b) The license for its operation and maintenance shall be issued by the Minister of Health after satisfactory proof that the minimum standard requirements for dental prosthetic laboratories are met and the rules and regulations as prescribed herein are complied with.

d) License to open, operate and maintain the prosthetic dental laboratories shall be for a duration of one year to be renewed before the expiration of the anniversary date of the original license.

e) Separate license is required for every dental prosthetic laboratory operated and maintained in separate location or premises although operated under the same management.

Section 5. License Fees. - 
a) A fee of ₱100.00 shall be charged for the issuance of license to open and operate a Dental Prosthetic Laboratory, payable to the Bureau of Dental Health Services. The amount herein collected shall be officially receipted.

b) a fee of ₱50.00 shall be charged for renewal of license in accordance with the provision of Section 4(d) and Section 15 hereof.

c) A grace period of two (2) months is allowed subject to a fine of ₱10.00.

d) After the grace period the license shall be considered to have lapsed and a new license shall be applied for.

e) All registered and licensed government prosthetic laboratories as well as dental laboratories operated by universities and colleges for the purpose of training dentistry students and dental technicians shall be exempted from paying the required fees.

Section 6. Transfer of Physical Plant. — Any owner, administrator, manager or operator of any dental prosthetic laboratory desiring to transfer the physical plant or location of his registered and licensed laboratory to another place shall be reported in writing to the Minister of Health within fifteen (15) days after transfer has been completed. His/her laboratory in its new location shall be subject to re-inspection and shall comply with the rules and regulations and standard requirements as provided herein.

Section 7. Transfer of License. - Any change in ownership or change or head of the laboratory shall be reported within fifteen (15) days in writing by the persons concerned to the Minister of Health for notation and approval. In case the transfer of ownership of license is found to be meritorious, an application for a new license by the new owner shall be required. Failure to report the change of ownership will automatically as revoke the license of the dental prosthetic laboratory.

Section 8. Training of Dental Laboratory Technicians. — Within six months following the initial registration and licensing of a dental prosthetic laboratory, all dental laboratory technicians without a certificate of a formal training, presently employed in that laboratory shall participate in an accelerated training program and complete the equivalent of one semester half—day training in a school for dental prosthetic laboratory technicians to be designated by the Minister of Health.

However, beginning the year 1980, all dental technicians engaged in work in dental prosthetic laboratories who failed to take advantage of the crash training program and all those aspiring to work in dental prosthetic laboratory as technicians must complete the requirements in Section 9(a).

Section 9. Requirements for a Dental Prosthetic Laboratory. —

1. Personnel - Dental Prosthetic Laboratory shall be under the direction and supervision of a licensed and qualified dentist. All dental laboratory technicians involved in the technical aspect of operation shall be a registered certified technician.

a) A Dental Technician must be at least a high school graduate and must have completed a two—Year Dental Technicians' Course in a duly accredited dental school or college. In lieu of a cerrtificate of the Technicians' Course <missingtext> </missingtext>

2. Physical Plant —

a) work rooms must be housed in a permanent building, preferably concrete or semi—concrete. Floor must be concrete, tiled or linoleum finished. It must also have an adequate drainage with special tank drain traps for wax and other solids.

b) The minimum size of the work room must not be less than eight (8) square meters and for every personnel not less than 1.75 square meters is alloted.

c) Provide adequate space for orderly placement of equipment, materials or apparatus.

d) Work rooms must be well—ventilated with provisions to maintain normal temperature preferably air—conditioned or at least provided with electric fan.

e) Shall be relatively dust—free with devices to absorb and collect dust and other particulates.

f) Work room must have an adequate source of natural light and provisions for effective artificial illumination.

g) Shall have adequate water supply for washing and cleaning facilities.

h) Must provide for fire safety and control device with access to fire exit.

i) Acids and other toxic chemicals containers shall be labeled clearly.

3. Equipment - Minimum equipment and apparatus for a Dental Prosthetic Laboratory providing prosthetic services:

a) Mechanical casting apparatus
b) Blow Torch-Gas Generator
c) Dental Lathe and accessories
d) Dental surveyors
e) Flask, full denture and partial
f) Flask duplicating device
g) Pressers
h) Cabinets
i) Glass container for Antiseptic for soaking restorations
j) Articulators, full denture and partial

4. Records — An adequate and effective system of recording for accepted and finished restorative cases must be in order. There should be proper filing storage, and indexing of names of dentists sending cases, including the classification of restoration being made in the laboratory.

Section 10. Inspection.

a) It shall be the duty of the Minister of Health or his authorized representative/s to inspect the dental prosthetic laboratory within sixty (60) days upon receipt of the application for registration and licensure to verify compliance with the prescribed rules and regulations and standard requirements.

b) Each licensee shall give the Minister of Health or his duly authorized representative/s the access at all reasonable time to the premises and facilities of the laboratory to conduct periodical inspection.

c) Each license shall make available all records kept by him pursuant  to these regulations for inspection by the Minister of Health or his duly authorized representative/s.

d) Regional Health Directors, Provincial, City and Municipal Health Officers are required to report the existence of unlicensed dental prosthetic laboratories, and/or violations of these rules to the Minister of Health.

Section 11. Modification and Revocation of License. - The terms and conditions of every license shall be subject to amendment or modification by means of amendments to these rules and regulations the Minister ofHealth may deem fit to suit. Any license may be revoked, suspended or modified in full or in part for any material false statement in the application as revealed by the statement of the applicant, or as shown by the record of inspection which will serve as basis for the Minister of Health to refuse issuance of license on an original application or for a violation of, or failure to observe any of the terms and provisions of these regulations. Except in cases of willful, or repeated violations hereof or where public health interest or safety requires otherwise, no license shall be modified, suspended or revoked unless prior notice has been made and the corresponding investigation conducted.

Section 12. Investigation of Charges or Complaint. - -Upon the filing of a complaint or charges duly sworn by any person, interested party or corporation against a dental prosthetic laboratory or any of its personnel to the effect that one or more of such personnel of an approved laboratory have violated or are violating P.D. 1542 or the provisions of these regulations, the Minister of Health or his duly authorized representative/s shall investigate the complaint or charge and verify if the dental prosthetic laboratory concerned or any of its personnel is guilty of the charges. If upon investigation, a person or persons are found violating the provisions of P. D. 1542 or any of these regulations, the Minister of Health shall cancel or revoke for a definite period of time the license of the said laboratory and the authority of the offending person or persons, without prejudice to taking the case to judicial authorities for criminal action.

Section 13. Exrpiration. — as provided for in Section 4 (d), every license shall expire on the anniversary date of the original or renewed license.

Section 14. Renewals.- Applications for renewal of license shall be filed two months prior to the expiration of the anniversary date of the original license on the prescribed form (BDHS Form 3—0) and upon payment of the required renewal fee as provided for in Section 5 (b) hereof. The Bureau of Dental Health Services shall process applications for renewal of license immediately upon receipt thereof, provided, however, that such laboratory may continue operation during the pendency of the final action on their applications, unless otherwise, advised or ordered by the Minister of Health to cease operation.

Section 15. Interpretation. — Except as specifically authorized by the Minister of Health in wriIting, no interpretation of the meaning of the rules and regulations or its part by any office or employee of the Office of the Minister of Health, other than a written interpretation by the Minister of Justice, will be recognized to be binding upon the Minister of Health.

Section 16. Penal Provision. — Any person who violates any provisions of PD. 1542 or the rules and regulations and standard requirement implementing the decree shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than one-month but not more than one year or by a fine of not less than TWO HUNDRED PESOS but not more than ONE THOUSAND PESOS or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 

Section 17. Effectivity. - These rules and regulations and standard  requirements shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>NONE</signtitle>