Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>07/26/1978</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 5 s. 1978</docnum>

TO: The Regional Health Directors, Chief of Agencies and Training and Teaching Hospitals

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Medical Colleges in Government Hospitals under the Ministry of Health.</subject>

<body>
In line with the directives of Prime Minister Ferdinand E. Marcos to improve the quality of life of the rural poor and render more effective health care service, the Ministry of Health, cognizant of its role in the development of manpower relevant to health needs, hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with the affiliation of Medical students in the Ministry of Health Teaching and Training Hospitals.

I. Responsibilities of the Ministry of Health Hospitals:

Training and Teaching Hospitals designated by the Minister of Health where Medical students may affiliate to obtain the desired clinical and surgical experiences must meet the following requirements:

1. Be a general or special hospital with not less than a 100 bed capacity and an average bed occupancy of not less than 80%. 

a. General Hospital must have departmentalized medical, surgical, OB-GYN and pediatric services for in-patients and out-patients. If possible, general hospitals should, in addition, set up communicable disease services and psychiatric services.

b. Special hospitals such as National Mental Hospital, National Orthopedic Hospital, San Lazaro Hospital, Dr. Jose Fabella Memorial Hospital and the National Children's Hospital together with the Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Hospital may be utilized for the training of Medical student affiliates along these specialized services.

2. Shall follow the ratio of one (1) Medical student affiliate for at least every five (5) patients per shift computed according to the actual percentage of bed occupancy of the hospital. Computation of the ratio will not be based on the number of beds of the hospital nor the number of out-patients served.

3. a. Second and third year Medical student affiliation shall be allowed only during office hours and should be accompanied by their corresponding preceptors.

b. Fourth year Medical student affiliation shall be allowed to go on 24-hour duty and shall be directly under the supervision <missingtext> </missingtext> preceptors assigned by the affiliating college.

The number of Medical student affiliates assigned in the above-mentioned areas will be decided on by the Chief of the Hospital in order to avoid unnecessary congestion in these areas.

4. Require affiliating college of Medicine to assign one clinical preceptor coming from their school to proctor every twelve (12) Medical students per shift. Clinical preceptors must be in complete prescribed uniform.

5. a. Formulate the general plan for the training of the Medical student affiliates in the hospital before the actual start of the school year.

b. Meet with the Deans of the Affiliating Medical Colleges sufficiently ahead of the start of the school year and shall schedule meetings with the Deans as often as deemed necessary by the hospital in order to ensure the effective implementation of the affiliation rules of the Ministry of Health for the upgrading of the standard of Medical education.

6. Have a well organized and administered medical service with qualified and adequate medical staff.

a. Orient the clinical preceptors coming from the medical colleges for not less than two (2) weeks and not more than four (4) weeks. Orientation must be given before the actual period of affiliation starts.

7. Have an adequate, well-maintained physical plant with the provision of necessary equipment and supplies including:

a. An intensive care unit or its equivalent
b. A well-equipped central supply service
c. A well-equipped main conference room
d. Library
e. Training Office
f. Suitable area for small group conferences in the wards.

8. Have a medical training staff responsible for the training educational program of the medical personnel of the hospital including the orientation of new clinical preceptors of the affiliating medical colleges.

II. Responsibilities of the Affiliating Colleges of Medicine

All colleges of Medicine must have met the following requirements before applying for the use of clinical facilities of a general or special training/teaching hospital of the Ministry of Health:

a. License from the Ministry of Education and Culture.
b. Compliance with the provisions of the Medical Law R.A. 5946.

These colleges shall:

1. Provide qualified clinical preceptors to guide, teach, supervise and evaluate students' clinical experiences in the training/teaching hospitals in accordance with the ratio of one (1) clinical preceptor per twelve (12) students. No students shall be sent to the clinical area without the clinical preceptor from the affiliating college. This does not include the medical interns on night duties assigned in the operating room, delivery room, nursery, emergency room, out-patient-department and in the wards who are directly under the hospital staff.

2. Pay or replace damages, breakages or losses by the faculty and students of hospital property, equipment and supplies.

3. See to it that all medical students before beginning their clinical practice in a particular area must have satisfactorily completed the theoretical aspect of that area.

4. Pay the hospital the amount of thirty pesos (₱30.00) for each second, third and fourth year medical student. Payment is due within the first five days of each month.

III. Procedure for filing application for affiliation:

Affiliation Application forms may be obtained by the Affiliating Schools, Colleges and Universities from the Ministry of Health Agency they are affiliating with.

The following must be fulfilled before affiliation applications will be processed by the Accreditation Committee on Training and Affiliation of Students in Ministry of Health Hospitals and Agencies:

1. Six copies of the New Contract of Affiliation properly filled up, signed and notarized.

2. One copy of the pertinent Administrative Order marked Annex-A to be attached to each of the contracts (one copy of the Administrative Order attached to each of the six copies of Contract of Affiliation).

3. Contracts coming from training hospitals and rural health units under Regional Directors must be accompanied by a letter of endorsement by the respective Regional Director.

4. New College of Medicine applying for affiliation must file their application with the Chief of Hospital. Six copies of the contract should be duly accomplished and submitted together with the:

a. approval of the Minister of Education and Culture
b. inspection report of the Board of Medicine, Professional Regulation Commission

5. The contracts must pass through Dr. Hector Santos for comment and initial before Dr. Tranquilino Elicaño, Jr., Chairman of the Committee, signs the contract and endorses them to the Minister of Health for final approval.

6. Renewal of contracts shall be done every two (2) years to include a status report of the college of medicine together with the submission of necessary forms as required by the Committee on Accreditations and Affiliation.

IV. Joint Responsibilities of Affiliating Colleges of Medicine and the Training and Teaching Hospitals

1. The clinical practice program of Medical students shall be the joint responsibilities of the Medical training staff of the hospital as well as the clinical preceptors of each respective school. Assignments and proper rotation of students for each area shall be prepared in accordance with the afore-mentioned rules. When there are two or more schools affiliating, the assignment of students may be on a two-shift basis.

2. Holding of joint conferences by the authorities of the hospital with the school for the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

3. Promotion of cooperation and harmonious working relationships among the teaching/training hospital personnel and school personnel. Periodic dialogue between the Medical service, Training staff and the Medical Colleges should be held in order to entertain suggestions and thresh out problems related to the program for the benefit of the patients and the students.

V. Special Provisions:

1. Government colleges of Medicine, such as the College of Medicine of the State Universities affiliating with the teaching and training hospitals of the Ministry of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees. They shall however be required to sign the appropriate Contract of Affiliation.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Ministry of Health</signtitle>