Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>06/23/1978</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 1 s., 1978</docnum>

TO: The Regional Health Directors, Chier of Agencies, and Training and Teaching Hospitals.

<subject>SUBJECT: Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Paramedical Schools and Colleges, i.e. Occupational and Physical Therapy in Ministry of Health Hospitals and Rural Health Units.</subject>

<body>
In line with the directives of President Ferdinand E. Marcos to improve the quality of life of the rural poor and render more effective health care service, the Ministry of Health, cognizant of its role in the development of manpower relevant to health needs, hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with in the affiliation of occupational and physical therapy students in the Ministry of Health Teaching and Training Hospitals and Rural Health Units.

I. Responsibilities of the Ministry of Health Hospitals and Rural Health Units

Training and Teaching Hospitals and Rural Health Units designated by the Ministry of Health where occupational and physical therapy students may affiliate to obtain the desired clinical and community health experiences must meet the following requirements:

For designated Training and Teaching Hospitals:

1. Be a general or special hospital with not less than 100 bed capacity and an average bed occupancy not less than 80%

a. General Hospitals must have departmentalized medical, surgical, OB-GYN and pediatric services for in-patients and out-patients. If possible, general hospitals dhould, in addition, set up psychiatric services.

b. Special hospitals such as the National Mental Hospitala, National Orthopedic Hospital, Sam Lazaro Hospital, Dr. Jose R. Fabella Memorial Hospital and the National Children's Hospital together with the  Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Hospital may be utilized for the training of occupational and physical therapy students affiliates along these specialized services.

2. Shall follow the ratio of one (1) occupational and physical therapist student affiliate for at least every four (4) patients computed according to the actual percentage of bed occupancy of the hospital. Computation of the ratio will not be based on the number of beds of the hospital nor the number of out-patients served.

3. a. OT and PT student affiliation shall be allowed only in the morning shift.

b. OT/PT students assigned in designated areas shall be accompanied by their corresponding clinical supervisors and/or be under the direct supervision of a professionally qualified registered OT with the PRC. The number of OT/PT student affiliates assigned to the work areas will be decided on by the chief of the OT/PT Service in order to avoid unnecessary congestion in such areas.

4. Require affiliating colleges and schools of occupational and physical Therapy to assign one (1) clinical instructor coming from their school or college to proctor every ten (10) OT/PT students.

Clinical supervisors for student affiliates must be in complete prescribed uniforms. Special hospitals should require that  clinical instructors shall have at least one year teaching experience before they are allowed to supervise the student affiliates in these hospitals. These clinical supervisors shall submit their biodata before orientation starts.

5. a. Formulate the general plan for the training of the student affiliates in the hospital before the actual start of the school year.

b. Meet with the principals/chairmen/authorized representatives of affiliating schools sufficiently ahead of the start of the school year and shall schedule meetings with the principals/chairmen/authorized representatives as often as deemed necessary by the hospital in order to ensure the effective implementation of the affiliation rules of the Ministry of Health for the upgrading of the standard of Occupational and Physical Therapy education.

6. Have a well organized and administered OT/PT service with qualified and aduquate OT/PT personnel.

a. Orient the clinical supervisors coming from the OT/PT schools and colleges for not less than one (1) week and not more than two (2) weeks. Orientation must be given before the actual period of affiliation starts.

7. Have an adequate, well maintained physical plant with the provision o necessary equipment and supplies including:

a. Functional OT unit or its equivalent
b. A well-equipped service for gadgets; splinting, recreational and supportive items or its equivalent.
c. A well-equipped main conference room
d. Library
e. OT/PT Office
f. Suitable area for small group conference near clinical areas.
g. A work center for patients or its equivalent.
h. Healthy open space for out-of-door activities.

8. Have a professional OT/PT training staff responsible for their respective training staff responsible for their respective training educational program of the OT/PT personnel of the hospital including the orientation of new clinical supervisors of the affiliating OT/PT schools.

9. Have a suitable dining space or its equivalent for th faculty and students while on clinical experience in the hospital upon proper arrangement between the school and the hospital authorities.

For Rural Health Units:

1. Have an organized rural health service to provide the necessary areas required for community helath occupational or physical therapy.

2. Must have adequate teaching facilities such as conference area, references, and teaching materials.

As part of the Community Health OT/PT experience for OT/PT students affiliating in Rural Health Units, selected 25 beds emergency hospital or areas with pre-surveyed data <missingtext> </missingtext> of the Provincial Health Officer.

Hospital and Rural Health Center authorities reserves the right and have the duty to suspend or cancel affiliation privileges of any school when the school authorities and/or thei respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation; and/or have violated the rules and regulations set; and/or affiliating students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the patients. The final decision in case any appeal is made however, by the Minister of Health, through the Accreditation Committee.

Ministry of Heath hospitals should enforce the rules and regulation set by the Administrative Order in accepting new OT/PT schools and colleges for affiliation and in renewing existing contracts with affiliating schools and colleges of Occupational/Physical Therapy.

Hospital and rural health authorities reserve the right to assign the OT/PT student affiliates to specific areas of the hospitals and rural health centers where they could be trained effectively in accordance with the arrangement between the school an hospital authorities.

Hospital and rural health authorities shall not allow OT/PT student affiliaates to enter the training areas in the hospital or field practice area without authorization from their clinical supervisors from the OT/PT schools and colleges. Absence of clinical supervisors must be reported by the hospital and rural health center to the schools and colleges concerned and to the Minister of Helath through the Accreditation Committee on Training and Student Affiliation. These reports shall be compiled by the Ministry of Health and Submitted to the Ministry of Education and Culture for appropriate action on the OT/PT schools and colleges concerned.

Any hospital that operates its own school of OT/PT should not allow any affiliation from private schools and colleges except for pioneering institutions when it does not have the suffecient number of students to adequately fulfill the ratio of one (1) OT/PT student per four (4) patients computed on the actual percentage of bed occupany of the hospital. Special arrangements may be allowed with the approval of the Accreditaion Committee.

Yearly reports on the affliation fees received showing the percentage of each category of personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Minister of Health thru the Accreditation Committee together with the narrative report on <missingtext> </missingtext>

II. Responsibilities of the Affiliating Schools/Colleges of Occupational/Physical Therapy.

All schools and colleges of OT/PT must have met the following requirements before applying the use of clinical facilities of a general or special training/teaching hospital and rural health center of the Department of Health:

a. Approval from the Ministry of Education and Culture and recommended by the Board of Occupational and Physical Therapy, Professional Regulation Commision.

b. Compliance with the provisions of the Philippine Physical and Occupational Therapy Law R.A. 5680.

These schools and colleges shall:

1. Provide clinical experience for their students under the supervision of a competent and duly registered iccupational/physical therapist in an accredited hospital or institution, as the case may be.

2. No student shall be sent to the clinical area without the clinical supervisor from the affiliating school/college who will guide, teach, supervise and evaluate students clinical and field experiences in the training/teaching hospitals and rural health centers in accordance to the ration mentioned herein except as provided for in this order.

3. Pay or replace damages, breakages or losses by the faculty and students of hospital and rural health center, property, equipment and supplies.

4. Enforce that the clinical practice of each student be set at a minimum of 20 hours per week.

5. See to it that all OT/PT students before beginning their clinical and field practice in a particular area must have satisfactorily completed the theoretical aspect of that area.

6. Pay the hospital or rural health unit the amount of twenty pesos (₱20.00) for each student per month. Payment is due within the first five days of each month.

III. <missingtext> </missingtext>

1. In Special Hospitals

Application shall be filled with the Chief of Hospital, Six copies of the duly accomplished contract shall be submitted to the Office of the Chairman, Committee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

2. In Regional and Provincial Hospitals
Application shall be filled with the Head of OT/PT approved by the Chief of Hospital. Six copies of the duly accomplished contract shall be forwarded to the Regional Health Director and submitted to the Chairman, Committee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

3. In Rural Health Centers
Application shall be filled with the Provincial Health Officer. Six Copies of the Duly accomplished contract shall be forwarded to the Regional Health Director and submitted to the Chairman, Commitee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

4. New Schools/College of OT/PT applying for Affiliation must file their application with the Chief of Hospital, or Provincial Health Officer. Six copies of the contract should be duly accomplished and submitted together with the:

a) approval of tha Ministry of Education and Culture;
b) Inspection report of the Board of Physical and Occupational Therapy, Professional Regulation Commision.

5. Renewal of contracts shall be done every two (2) years to include a status report of the school/college of OT/PT together with the submission of necessary forms as required by the Committee on Accreditation and Affiliation.

IV. Joint Responsibilities of Affiliating Schools and Colleges of OT/PT and the Training and Teaching Hospitals and Rural Health Centers.

1. The clinical and field practice program of OT/PT students shall be joint responsibilities of the OT/PT training staff of the hospital and rural health centers as well as the clinical supervisors of each respective school. AAssignments and proper rotation of students for each area shall be prepared in accordance with the aforementioned rules. When there are two or <missingtext> </missingtext> the assignment of students should <missingtext> </missingtext> schools/colleges and <missingtext> </missingtext>

2. <missingtext> </missingtext> conference by the authorities of the hospital and rural health centers with the school for the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

3. Promotion of cooperation and harmonious working relationships among the teaching/training rural health center personnel and school personnel. Periodic dialogue between the OT/PT Service, Training Staff and the OT/PT Schools/Colleges should be held in order to entertain suggestions and thresh out <missingtext> </missingtext> problems related to the program for the benefit of the patients and the students.

V. Special Provisions:

1. All schools of OT/PT and Related Rehabilitaion disciplines under the Ministry of Health affiliating with other teaching and training hospitals and rural health centers of the Ministry of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees and the signing of the appropriate Contract of Affiliation.

2. All other government schools and colleges of OT/PT such as Schools/Colleges of OT/PT of State Universities affiliating with teaching and training hospitals and rural health centers of the Ministry of Health shall be governed by the above rules and regulations except those that pertain to the payment of affiliation fees. They shall however, be required to sign the approprite Contract of Affiliation.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediatly.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>