Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
Office of the Minister
Manila

<date>05/31/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINSTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 23 s. 1979</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Skilled manpower development and dispersal pursuant to P. D. 1424 as implemented by Administrative Order No. 6, s. 1978.</subject>

<body>
The following guidelines shall be observed in the skilled medical manpower development and dispersal program pursuant to P.D. 1424 as implemented by dministrative Order No. 6, s. 1978:

1. Resident Physicians of accredited departments in all Teaching and Training hospitals under the Ministry of Health shall during the last year of their Residency Training Program participate in this dispersal program by serving for three (3) months if their Residency Training is less than four (4) years and for a period of six (6) months if their Residency Training Program is four (4) years or more.

2. All Teaching and Training hospitals shall submit to the Accreditation Committee, the names of these Resident Physicians in their last year of residency and appointed after June 9, 1978 for proper monitoring and dispersal.

3. The Chief of the medical center/regional hospitals shall propose thru their Regional Health Office Director, to the Accreditation Committee, the schedule of manpower dispersal in his region subject to the approval of the Minister of Health.

4. Graduating Resident Physicians participating in this program shall be assigned as follows:

a. From special hospitals will be sent to medical centers and regional hospitals.
b. From medical centers to regional hospitals.
c. From regional hospitals to Teaching and Training provincial hospitals of the same region.
d. From Teaching and Training provincial hospitals to non—Teaching and Training hospitals in the same province.

5. In the interest of consistency/uniformity in the Teaching and Training program prior to their dispersal, the Resident Physicians shall report to the Chief, Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Hospital, for two (2) weeks in order to familiarize themselves with the standard Teaching and Training program for his/her specialty. 
 
6. The Resident Physicians during their dispersal shall not only render service but also assist the Chief of the receiving hospital in setting up Teaching and Training programs in their respective fields of specialty, specifying among others, the equipment and manpower needs as well as space requirements, etc. 

7. The Chief of the receiving hospital shall rate the Resident Physician on his over-all performance, attitude and initiative and shall give a rating from 2 points to 10 points as follows:

Outstanding — 10
Very Satisfactory - 8
Satisfactory — 6
Fair — 4
Unsatisfactory — 2

This rating will be officially submitted by the Chief of the receiving hospital to the Chairman, Accreditation Committee, Ministry of Health, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila, in order that due credit can be added to the grades of the Resident Physician when he takes the qualifying examination for Medical Specialist in Ministry of Health hospitals.

8. Those who resign or discontinue residency training on their own will, shall reimburse all salaries, emoluments received during their residency training to the hospitals where they underwent their residency.

9. Should the dispersal of the Resident Physicians take effect after the expiration of their residency training, they shall be extended an appointment to cover the period of service/extended tour of duty to satisfy the legal requirements of auditing and accounting rules and regulations.

10. No Resident Physicians in Teaching and Training hospitals shall be terminated and awarded their certificates of training unless they participate in the dispersal program.

11. The Resident Physicians concerned shall continue receiving their salary from their respective hospitals {sending hospitals).

All per diems and transportation expenses officially incurred by the Resident Physicians from the time he leaves the sending hospital until he returns to the sending hospital after his tour of duty will be chargeable against the funds of the receiving agency subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing regulations.

In order to expedite the implementation of this program, the sending hospitals shall advance the funds for transportation expenses of the Resident Physicians and will be fully refunded by the receiving hospitals.

12. The sending agency shall not fill up the positions left by those dispersed until such time that they have already completed their dispersal assignments and/or appointed to another position.

13. The Resident Physician dispersed to any particular hospital shall be given preference in appointments to any vacant. pos1tion of Senior Resident or Medical Specialist (Full time or Part-time) in that particular hospital provided the rating for his services during his tenure of dispersal is not less than satisfactory.

14. A graduate Resident shall be extended a temporary appointment as Senior Resident or Medical Specialist pending his certification by the Certifying Specialty Board of the Ministry of Health. This temporary appointment is allowable only for one year and should the graduate resident fail to qualify in the said examination, he shall be transferred to a service hospital in order to complete the required number of years of services as per the provisions of Administrative Order No. 6, s. 1978.

This Order, being issued in the interest in the service, is hereby declared official, confirmed and made of record.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>