Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>11/27/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 60 s. 1979</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Medical Manpower Development and Placement Program on Training and Teaching Hospitals under the Ministry of Health.</subject>

<body>
The Ministry of Health by virtue of its position must provide leadership in the delivery of health care in the country. The Ministry is aware that the number of qualified medical practitioners is not only insufficient but also unevenly distributed that care at periphery is found to be most wanting. The Ministry must have the cooperation of the private medical sector and that it must adopt short and long range strategies in order that quality care at all levels and in all areas can be delivered at all times. To implement the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1424 and Administrative Order No. 52 s. 1979 issued November 8, 1979, this Administrative Order is issued to amend Administrative Order No. 6 dated July 27, 1978 and Administrative Order No. 23 dated May 13, 1979.

PART I

GENERAL GUIDELINES

The following guidelines shall be observed to implement Administrative Order No. 52 dated November 8 s. 1979 pursuant to Presidential Decree 1424.

1. Prepare a residency training program that will serve as the model for all similar specialty departments under the Ministry of Health. The model must contain the minimum of requirements along with the residency training programs of designated Training and Teaching Hospitals under the Ministry can pattern and expand, depending upon their respective facilities.

2. Establishment of an approved Residency Training Programs of the different specialty departments of designated Teaching and Training Hospitals under the Ministry as accredited by the Committee.

2.1. Accredited Residency Programs shall maintain a standard set and shall be subject to annual assessment by the Executive Committee.

2.2. Standards.

2.2.1. The section shall recommend basic minimum requirements necessary to carry out a residency training program which shall include bed capacity and average bed occupancy rate, number of medical specialist and residents items, qualifications of department heads, equipment and instruments necessary and medical books and medical journals.

2.2.2. Review the written residency training program which must contain the basic minimum requirements as expressed in the model for the specialty.

2.3. Mechanics for Accreditation of Training Program.

2.3.1. The Chief of Hospital will submit the application in duplicate, to the MMD Committee.

2.3.2. A date for inspection shall be set to assess and evaluate the application for accreditation.

2.3.3. Action taken on the application and recommendation shall be forwarded to the Chief of Hospital.

2.3.4. Members of the Medical Manpower Development Committee shall be entitled to collect per diems, transportation allowances and other incidental expenses pursuant to Memorandum Circular No. 127, s. 1973 of the Commission on Audit chargeable against the funds of the requesting hospital.

2.4. Monitoring of Residency Training Program and other Training Programs:

2.4.1. Committee shall keep record of all training resident items in all of the hospital with accredited residency training program.

2.4.2. The Committee shall require each hospital to submit annually the list of all residents appointments and all terminations of appointments for precise monitoring of the movements of medical manpower in training.

2.4.3. The Committee shall require Training Hospitals to promptly submit the list of residents in the 1st month or the final year for the purpose of placement in community service and post residency assignment.

2.4.4. The Committee shall keep record of all those who underwent training under residency fellowship and special program for purpose of continuing medical education and update roster of trained medical manpower.

3. Assist Chief of Hospital in upgrading service and Training capabilities.

3.1. Acts on request for placement of qualified medical staff.

3.2. Assists MOH Training Hospitals to have their Residency Training Program be accredited by the Professional specialty societies/boards.

4. Assists the Medical Specialists and Senior Residents of Hospitals under the Ministry to pass the Ministry qualifying examinations.

4.1. Conduct review courses.

4.2. Conduct post-graduate courses in coordination with the Medical Societies.

4.3. Encourage Medical Specialist and others in becoming certified by the various specialty societies/specialty boards.

5. Hold qualifying examinations for Medical Specialist positions in hospitals under the Ministry of Health.

5.1. Objectives.

5.1.1. To qualify present incumbents who are temporarily appointed to medical specialist positions.

5.1.2. To qualify senior resident for promotion to Medical Specialists position.

5.1.3. To qualife graduates of accredited residency program under the Ministry of Health and other similar programs.

5.1.4. Qualifying examinations shall be held simultaneously in a date and venue to be announced by the Minister of Health as recommended by the Committee.

5.2. Mechanics and Procedures.

5.2.1. Regional Offices shall provide all hospital under their region the necessary application forms. All applicants for the qualifying examination can secure their application form from the Regional Offices or the nearest Teaching-Training Hospital.

5.2.2. Application forms properly filled up must be received by the Office of the Medical Manpower Development Committee Chairman not later than two months before the scheduled date of examination. This can be done personally or by mail. Late applications shall not be processed.

5.2.3. All applications shall be forwarded by the Medical Manpower Development Committee to the different Heads of Sections where it shall be processed and acted upon.

5.2.4. All sections must submit to Medical Manpower Development Committee a list of those who meet and those who have not met the requirements to take the examination not later than one month before the date of examination for transmition to concerned by the MMDC.

5.2.5. The section heads shall submit the list of those who passed or failed the examination to the Chairman of MMD Committee for transmittal to concerned.

PART II - MEDICAL TRAINING PROGRAMS

1. Residency Training Program under Presidential Decree 1424 amending Republic Act 1243 as amended by Republic Act No. 2251 otherwise known as Hospital Residency Law.

1.1. The residency programns under various disciplines are to be conducted only in accredited Teaching and Training Hospitals.

1.2. Residency programs must be accredited by the Medical Manpower Development Committee.

1.3. Participants in the residency program must be Filipino citizens and selected in accordance to the following priorities.

1.3.1. Physicians in the government service in the rural areas with one year of service.

1.3.2. Adjunctship or equivalent training for a year.

1.3.3. New graduate who passed the Philippine Medical Board.

1.4. The effectivity of all appointments for residents shall be for a year and shall preferably start on the first of January and July.

1.5. Renewal of appointments shall be extended to those who have met successfully the requirements of the previous years.

2. Special detail residency program:

2.1. Residents of Teaching and Training Hospitals sent to train in Medical Centers within or outside the Ministry of Health.

2.2. Request for such arrangement shall be made through the MMD Committee.

2.3. Salaries, allowances and other expenses shall be drawn from the funds of the sending hospitals/agency subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedures.

2.4. Special detail resident: per diems and transportation expenses shall be in accordance to existing provisions.

2.5. Administrative control shall be with the receiving hospital. They may not be recalled without consent by the receiving hospital.

2.6. Renewal of appointments - The receiving hospital shall recommend the renewal of appointment to the sending hospital.

2.7. For poor performance the Medical Center reserves the right to terminate the training of the resident without prejudice to administrative action of the sending hospital <missingtext> </missingtext>

<missingtext> </missingtext> Residency Training Program.

3.1. Under this program linkage is established between accredited programs of designated training hospitals under the Ministry of Health.

3.2. Under this program exchange of residents is established which exposes residents to two systems.

3.3. Provisionms of residency program under P.D. shall also apply.

4. Special Programs

4.1. Ministry of Health assisted training programs:

Residents in their third or fourth year of Training in non-MOH Medical Centers can be offered financial assistance.

4.1.1. Appointments may be extended to third year or fourth year residents. Vacant MOH residency items will be utilized.

4.1.2. Those extended appointments shall be detailed to the Medical Center where he is training.

4.1.3. Contracts shall be signed and he shall serve the hospital whose items was utilized.

4.2. Specialty society sponsored residency training programs:

Under this program, facilities and manpower of various hospital shall be utilized as sponsored by Fellows/Diplomates of the Society.

4.2.1. The Specialty Society will screen and recommend applicants MDC for approval of MOH.

4.2.2. Applicants nominated by the society shall be appointed using vacant resident items in Teaching and Training hospitals.

4.2.3. Appointees may be rotated to various hospitals participating in the program and under the supervision of the society.

4.2.4. Contracts shall be signed and he shall serve the hospital whose item was utilized.

4.3. In-Service Training Programs - To solve immediate needs, a three to six months crash training program in coordination with the Bureau of Medical Services and OHEPT.

4.4. Ministry of Health Hospital Linkage with Medical Schools:

Under this program the hospitals under the Ministry can utilize the faculty of the Medical School who in turn may avail of the clinical interest of said hospital.

4.5. Attendance to Medical Conventions - Encourage attendance on official business or official time. Credits to be given to residents when attending scientific meetings in evaluating their application for renewal of their appointments.

PART III - RECRUITMENT PROGRAM

1. Medical Information Service - Through a brochure containing medical information on hospital facilities, number of qualified medical practitioners in various discipline, economic potentialities to attract medical graduates to work and train in the different regions. This information can also attract qualified medical practitioners to the area.

2. Convert full time Medical Specialist items into part-time medical specialist items. This will not only increase the available items for the manpower placement program but can also attract qualified practitioners because of the privilege for private practice.

3. Recommend lump sum appropriation for professional lecturer.

4. Qualified medical practitioners from the locality are encouraged for appointment in MOH hospitals.

5. Creation of new part time medical specialist in accordance with standards set up by the Committee on Hospital standardization.

6. Incentive for medical specialist positions which can attract qualified practitioners to the government service.

PART IV - MEDICAL MANPOWER PLACEMENT PROGRAM

1. Community Service - Residents training under P.D. 1424 in their last year shall serve three months in a hospital under the Ministry of Health where their newly acquired skills can be utilized.

1.1. Residents rendering community service shall not only render service but shall assist in upgrading the department of his assignment and assist in setting up a training program.

1.2. All Chiefs of training hospital shall submit to the MMD Committee the names of all residents in their last year with the date of their last appointments and the specialty of their training. This must be submitted in the first month of their last year of training.

1.3. Request for assignments of residents to render community service by the Chiefs of Hospital must contain the specialty needed and facilities and manpower available in order to know how effective the placement is going to be.

1.4. The Executive Committee shall be responsible for the placement and monitoring of residents rendering community service.

1.5. All residents for community service shall report to the executive committee in orientation and briefing.

1.6. Salaries of residents in community service shall be drawn against the funds of the sending hospital. Upon submission of the Daily Time Records duly signed by the Chief of Hospital of receiving hospital.

1.7. Residents rendering community service shall be entitled to per diems and travelling allowances chargeable against the funds of receiving hospital subject to the availability of funds and the usual accounting and auditing procedures.

1.8. The Chief of Hospital upon completion of the community service of the resident shall submit a report of his performance to MMD Committee.

1.9. The resident upon completion of his community service shall report to the MMD Committee for debriefing and for post-residency service assignment.

2. Post-Residency Service - The Residents training under P.D. 1424 upon completion of their residency training shall serve in hospitals under the Ministry of Health for 1 year Full-time or Part-time.

2.1. The Chiefs of Hospital shall submit to the Committee regularly as required the number of Medical Specialist and Senior Resident items and their categorization as to Specialties together with the list of vacancies of Medical Specialist and Senior Residents position.

2.2. The committee shall develop a system of matching between the hospital and those participating in the post-residency service.

2.3. Appointments to those who are serving their post-residency service shall be on a temporary basis until he passes the qualifying examination.

3. For Residents, special detail residents, and special program MOH assisted residency and specialty society residency programs upon completion of their training residency shall be returned to the sending hospital who sponsored their training, to serve for one year.

PART V - CERTIFICATION

1. All graduates of the residency training program under P.D. 1424 shall receive certificate of residency training after completing the post-residency service. The certificate shall be signed by the Chief of Hospital, the Chairman MMD Committee and the Minister of Health.

2. All graduates shall receive their certificate of training after completing their residency. The certificate shall be signed by the Chief of Hospital where they trained, the Chairman MMD Committee and the Minister of Health.

3. Certificate of residency training shall be awarded to those who have completed their residency training under the sponsorship of a Specialty Society immediately upon completion and signed by the President of the specialty society, Chairman of the MMD Committee and the Minister of Health.

4. For those who passed the qualifying examination given by the MMD Committee shall receive a certification of having passed the qualifying examination and signed by members of the section, the Chairman of MMD Committee and the Minister of Health.

PART VI - PENALTY CLAUSE

1. Residents who willfully refuse to go on community service or fail to render post-residency service or those who resign from his residency training without very strong reasons shall be asked to reimburse the amount spent for his training.

2. Residents through his fault fail to render his community and post-residency service shall not be awarded his residency training certificate.

3. Residents who fail to render his community and post-residency service shall be barred from holding any government position for breach of contract. Civil Service Commission shall be notified of this action.

4. Failure to honor his contract shall ban him from leaving the country. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall be notified.

PART VII - SPECIAL PROVISIONS

1. A contract between the training hospital and the applicant for residency training stipulating therein the terms of contract shall be signed before the appointment can be processed.

2. Applicant who have finished a residency training in one specialty are inhibited from being appointed to another specialty residency training in MOH hospital.

3. Exemptions to the community service shall be allowed only for very strong reasons and under very meritorious circumstances and only upon request of the Chief of Hospital and approval of the Minister of Health as recommended by the Executive Committee of the MMD Committee.

This Order is effective upon approval and all other orders inconsistent with this order is hereby repealed.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>