<missingtext> </missingtext>
Ministri ng Kalusugan
TANGGAPAN NG MINISTER
Maynila

<date>12/27/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 72 s. 1979</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Further amendments to Administrative Order No. 43 and 46 prescribing guidelines on administrative matters and delegating authority to certain officials in the Office of the Minister of Health.</subject>

<body>
Administrative Order No. 43 dated September 12, 1979, are hereby further amended to attain faster flow of official papers and to clarify certain procisions thereof. For ease of reference, the entire amended order is hereby re-stated:

In order to streamline office procedures and to expedite action on administrative matters, the following guidelines, delegations of authority and proper coursing of communications in the Office of the Minister are hereby issued for the information, guidance and strict compliance by all concerned:

1. The following matters shall be prepared for the signature of the Minister of Health:

A. Appointments, resignations, retirement applications or requests for transfer of officials occupying positions from Range 67 and above and those in the Career Executive Service;

B. Ministry circulars, administrative orders, ministry orders and other administrative issuance of Ministry-wide application;

C. Contracts involving:
C1. Construction of hospitals, main health stations and barangay health stations
C2. Renovation, repair and improvement of buildings under the Office of the Minister
C3. Affiliations of private schools with MOH teaching and training institutions
C4. Acceptance of donations
C5. Janitorial Services
C6. Terminate proofing services

D. Referral of Administrative compliants involving officials mentioned in Letter A;

E. Decisions on Administrative cases of all officials and employees;

F. Resolutions on petitions for consideration of decisions rendered in administrative cases against officials and employees;

G. Decisions on protested appointments except those delegated to Regional Health Director;

H. Requisitions and purchase orders for drugs and medicines involving the regional health offices except in cases of emergency when they are authorized to purchase in the amount not exceeding ₱10,000 a month. Hospitals under  the regional health offices shall be excluded pending the establishment of guidelines for centralized purchasing program for drugs and medical supplies to be undertaken by the office of the Minister for all its offices. In the case of these hospitals, the pertinent provisions of Administrative Order No. 297 dated July 14, 1976 shall continue to apply;

I. Requisition and purchase orders for drugs and medicines, equipment supplies or materials by any of the special hospitals directly under the Office of the Minister, except in cases of emergency when they are authorized to purchase drugs and medicines in the amount not exceeding ₱10,000 a month;

J. Requisitions and purchase orders for drugs and medicines of line and staff bureaus, offices, services and projects under the Office of the Minister;

K. Requisitions and purchase orders for supplies, materials or equipment above ₱3,000 in the staff bureas and staff services under the Central Office;

L. Legal opinions of the Ministry;

M. Increase in the bed capacity of all hospitals under the Ministry;

N. Reclassification of key positionsin all offices;

O. Compensation benefits under Section 699 of the Revised Administrative Code;

P. Request to;

P1. Travel abroad on official business, on official time or on leave of absence;

P2. Engagein private business, private employment;

P3. Teach outside of office hours or to continue studies after office hours;

P4. To acquire public land;

P5. To approve leave applications of Care Executive Service Offices and other heads of offices;

The following delegations of authority are hereby granted to the officials specified below;

1. The Deputy Minister of Health:

A. To sign appointments in the first and second level of the Career Service up to Range 66 except those previously delegated to Regional Health Directors;

B. To approve requests for transfer, accept resignations and recommend the retirement applicationsof personnel occupying positions from Range 57 to Range 66;

C. To approve contracts of lease involving rental of quarters of hospital personnel entitled thereto under the law;

D. To approve applications for leave of absence without pay beyond six months but not exceeding one year of all officials and employees under the Office of the Minister except members of the Career Executive Service and other heads of offices;

E. To handle and act on administrative complaints involving personnel up to Range 66;

F. To recommend requests for reclassification of positions below Range 67 when such conform with the approved organizational structure of the office;

G. To handle and act on protested appointments as Chairman of the Ministry Protests and Evaluation Committee;

H. To handle and act on requests for compensation, disability retirement applications and other similar cases as Chairman of the Physical Examination Committee;

I. To approve the disposition of records for submission to the Bureau of Records Management;

J. To handle other matters which may be referred to him from time to time by the Minister of Health.

2. The Acting Assistant Secretary for Personnel Management and Development;

A. To approve requests for transfer, accept resignations and recommend retirement applications of personnel occupying positions from Range 38 to 56;

B. To certify to the attendance of health officials and employees in the required pre-departure briefings of the Rural Service Program under LOI 599;

C. To handle and act on papers pertaining to the Future Leaders Program, the Rural Service Program and the Buklod ng Kabataang Kawani and other matters pertaining to personnel management and development;

D. To handle on act on matters pertaining to the Career Executive Service Officers in the Ministry;

E. To sign certificates of appearance of field personnel when their travel to Manila has been authorized by the Minister of Health or the regional health directors for a prescribed period of time;

F. To handle and act on applications for employment;

G. To handle and act on any other matters which may ba referref to him by the Minister or the Deputy Minister from time to time.

3. The Acting Chief Administrative Service;

A. To approve applications for leave of absence with pay, whether with commutation of salary or not, of all officials and employees in the Central Office except members of the Career Executive Service and other heads of offices;

B. To approve applications for leave of absence without pay not exceeding six months of all officials and employees except members of the Career Executive Service and other heads of offices;

C. To approve clearance certificates from property and money accountabilities after proper action thereon by the officials concerned;

D. To approve abstracts of canvass of prices made by the Supply Section and the Transport Section;

E. To approve requisitions and purchase orders for supplies and materials requisitioned by the staff bureaus and staff services in the Central Office in the amount not exceeding ₱3,000;

F. To sign payrolls of the officials and employees of the Central Office;

G. To sign certificates of appearance of field personnel in the absence of the authorized official;

H. To handle and act on other matters which may be referred from time to time by the Minister, the Deputy Minister or other higher officials.

In the implementation of this Order, proper coursing of communication should be strictly observed by the chiefs of divisions and lower echelon personnel. Correspondence prepared for the signature of the Minister should be gone over and initialed by the Deputy Minister and the officials referred to in this Order. The same procedure applies to official matters prepared for the signature of the Deputy Minister and other officials.
</body>

<sign> </sign>
<signtitle> </signtitle>