Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>02/23/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 41 s. 1979</docnum>

TO: Regional Health Directors, Provincial Health Officers, Chiefs of Hospital, Rural Health Physicians and others concerned.

<subject>Subject: Rules and Regulations Governing Affiliation of Undergraduate Nutrition Students and Student Nurses in Government Hospitals and Rural Health Units under the Ministry of Health.</subject>

<body>
Malnutrition is a major health problem in the Philippines requiring skilled manpower not only in its eradication but also in its prevention. It is a crippling disease affecting not only the body but also the mind and therefore, can be an impediment to national development. Realizing the need for well-trained public health nutritionists and dietitians to support the government's nutrition program and cognizant of its role in the preparation of nutrition and dietetics practitioners in the Philippines, the Ministry of Health hereby promulgates the following rules and regulations to be strictly observed and complied with affiliation of Undergraduate Nutrition Students and Student Nurses Schools and Colleges in Government Hospitals under the Ministry of Health Agencies.

I. Responsibilities of the Ministry of Health

A. Public Health Nutrition

Provinces and municipalities designated by the Ministry of Health thru the National Nutrition Service where undergraduate nutrition students may affiliate to obtain the necessary skills and knowledge in community nutrition must meet the following requirements:

1. A senior dietary nutritionist or a dietary nutritionist must be present in the region or provinces, respectively, in order to orient, supervise and guide the nutrition affiliates in their field practice.

2. The province must have on-going nutrition programs such as Mothercraft centers or other organized classes in which at least ten (10) students can participate.

Formulation by the National Nutrition Service of the general affiliate training program.

1. The minimum requirement for the length of affiliation period shall be 180 hours for undergraduate nutrition students.

2. A didactic training shall be given for one week (5 days) at the NNS HQ or Regional Health Office before the affiliates are fielded.

3. Length of field practice shall be 4 weeks - 180 hours for undergraduate nutrition students.

B. Hospital Dietetics

Government hospitals in the region designated by the Ministry of Health thru the Bureau of Medical Services, Dietary Service where Undergraduate Nutrition Students and Student Nurses may affiliate to obtain the necessary skills and knowledge in Hospital Dietary Service must meet the following requirements:

1. A registered nutritionist-dietitian assisted by another registered dietitian must be in-charge in the dietary Service of the hospital to guide the students during the training course.

2. The Dietary Service of the hospital must have an organized training program in which it shall not exceed 3 undergraduate nutrition students and 3 student nurses to every registered Dietitian actually employed by the hospital.

3. The Hospital Dietary Service must have well-planned facilities in order that it can be accredited for training. The accreditation of the Hospital Dietary Service may be obtained after a tour by the members of the Committee has been done as requested and at the expense of the requesting agencies.

Formulation by the NNS with the Bureau of Medical Services, Dietary Service of the general affiliate training programs.

1. The minimum requirement for the length of affiliation period shall be 120 hours for NNS, 80 hours of which shall cover the clinical phase of the hospital (Dietary Service) and 40 hours of which shall cover the administrative phase.

2. The minimum requirement for the length of affiliation period shall be two weeks for student nurses to cover the therapeutic, educational and administrative phase of the Hospital Dietary Service.

C. Hold conference meetings with the Heads of affiliating agencies before, during and after the affiliation as often as deemed necessary to assure the effective implementation of the Ministry of Health's affiliation rules and regulations.

D. Require affiliating schools and colleges to assign one (1) Nutritionist-Dietitian preceptor per twenty-five (25) students. These preceptors shall help in the evaluation and supervision of students as well as the training program.

E. Must have a registered Nutritionist-Dietitian training staff responsible for the orientation training program of affiliating students and preceptors.

F. Require the students to wear their complete uniform.

G. The Regional Health Training Center, thru the Senior Dietary Nutritionist, shall act as the coordinator for both training in public health nutrition and hospital dietetics

The place of affiliation will be based on the student's choice subject to the approval of the National Nutrition Service and or the Bureau of Medical Services, Dietary Service, Ministry of Health authorities reserve the right to give final approval on the place of assignment of student affiliates.

The Ministry of Health, thru the Accreditation Committee reserves the right and has duty to suspend or cancel affiliation privileges of any school when the school authorities and/or their respective students have not complied with the requirements of the contract of affiliation and/or have violated the rules and regulation set; and/or the affiliating students have repeatedly committed errors detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of their subjects. The final decision in case any appeal is made by the affiliating schools and colleges shall be made, however, by the Ministry of Health through the Accreditation Committee.

The rules and regulations set by this Administrative Order should be enforced by Regional and Provincial Chiefs in accepting affiliating undergraduate nutrition students and student nurses and in renewing contracts.

Quarterly reports on the affiliation fees received showing percentage of each category of personnel and the budgetary outlay showing the proposed amount for each personnel participating in the affiliation program must be submitted to the Ministry of Health through the Accreditation Committee together with the narrative report on the status and/or problems of the affiliation program.

II. Responsibilities of Affiliating Agencies

Only colleges and schools which are licensed by the Ministry of Education and Culture will be allowed to affiliate with the Ministry of Health agencies.

Affiliating agencies shall:

1. Obtain affiliation contract forms from the National Nutrition Service or Regional Health Offices and accomplish them properly before submission to the Ministry of Health for final approval through the Chairman of the Accreditation Committee.

2. Provide a field preceptor to guide, teach, supervise and evaluate student's field work in accordance to the ratio of 1 preceptor: 25 students. The field preceptor must have at least one (1) year experience in public health nutrition and hospital dietary service have undergone a one-week orientation with the National Nutrition Service, and one-week orientation with the Bureau of Medical Services, Dietary Service.

3. Guarantee that their affiliates shall be responsible for any damages, breakages and losses of the Ministry of Health property, equipment and supplies.

4. Enforce that public health practice of each undergraduate nutrition students be set at 4 weeks duration, that hospital dietary services training be set at 3 weeks duration and for student nurses at 2 weeks duration.

5. See to it that all students shall have first satisfactorily completed theoretical aspects in nutrition education, normal and therapeutic nutrition, methods of nutritional assessment, infant feeding, Institutional Food Service, etc.

6. Remit an affiliation fee of ₱30.00 per undergraduate nutrition student and ₱10.00 per student nurse for the period covered in affiliation.

7. See to it that instructors and students observe and abide with the policies, rules and regulations set by the Ministry of Health and that professional discipline be maintained at all times.

III. Joint Responsibility of Affiliating Schools/Colleges/Internship Committee and the Ministry of Health.

1. The training program shall be a joint responsibility of the Ministry of Health and Schools/Colleges/Hospitals. Assignment of students shall be in accordance with the aforementioned rules.

2. Joint conferences of schools/colleges/internship committee with the Ministry of Health officials shall be in accordance to ensure the proper implementation, evaluation and improvement of the program.

3. Promotion of cooperation and harmonious working relationship among teaching/training personnel and school/hospital personnel.

This Administrative Order supersedes all issuances on this matter and shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Ministry of Health</signtitle>