Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
Office of the Minister
Manila

<date>07/06/1979</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 36, s. 1979</docnum>

TO: All Regional Health Directors and Chiefs of all Ministry of Health Hospitals.

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementation of New Rules and Regulations to Effectively Upgrade theManpower Development Program of the Ministry of Health.</subject>

<body>
In line with Presidential Decree No. 1424 and implementing Administrative Order No. 6, s. 1978, the following are to beimplemented in order to upgrade the Medical Manpower Development Program of the Ministry of Health so that the medical manpower needs in Ministry of Health hospitals can be adequately met:

1. AFFILIATION PROGRAM:
Only accredited departments in teaching and training hospitals will be allowed to admit affiliating medical and paramedical students. Only the personnel of these accredited departments in teaching and training hospitals will be allowed to participate in th disbursement of affiliation fees in line with the rules and regulations of the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of the Budget.

All previously designated teaching and training hospitals which have now fallen short of the new criteria of the Ministry of Health are given a one (1) year grace period or up to August 1, 1980 to improve and upgrade in order that they may be properly accredited as teaching and training hospitals and thus effectively participate and benefit from the Medical Manpower Development Program of the Ministry of Health.

2. CHANGE OF STATUS:
All vacant items of Medical Specialties (full time) in all Ministry of Healthhospitals will be changed to Medical Specialist (part-time).

1.e One Medical Specialist I (full time) will be converted to one Medical Specialist I (part-time)
One Medical Specialist II (full time) will be converted to one Medical Specialist II (part-time)
One Medical Specialist III (full time) will be converted to one Medical Specialist III (part-time)

3. PRIVATE PRACTICE PRIVILEGES FOR PART-TIME PHYSICIANS AND PART-TIME MEDICAL SPECIALISTS:
Since part-time physicians and part-time Medical Specialists are allowed a certain amount of private practice privileges, the following rules and regulations are to be implemented for these part-time physicians and part-time Medical Specialists in order to avoid confusion and misunderstanding leading to deterioration of service as well as abuse of these privileges.

CHARITY PATIENTS
1. All physicians and Medical Specialists (part-time) in Ministry of Health hospitals must render free services to all charity patients.

PAYING PATIENTS
A. NON-MEDICARE
ECO I - 1. All patients are considered as house cases.
2. These patients are under thecare of Resident Trainees and/or Senior Resident Physicians of the Hospital.
3. All fees (including those for ancillary services) paid by the patients will go to the hospital fund. If a Medical Specialist (part-time) renders service to the patient, his professional fee will go to the hospital funds.
4. All professional fees will be based on DOH-PMA guidelines.

ECO II, III and IV
1. DOH-PMA Guideline on professional fees will be followed.
2. Physicians (part-time) and Medical Specialists (part-time) may attend to these private patients even during their official office hours as long as they have already satisfactorily attended to their official duties and responsibilities in the hospital.
3. The physician (part-time) and Medical Specialist (part-time) may collect their professional fees.

B. MEDICARE
ECO I - 1. All medicare fees will be collected in a pool and divided among personnel in accordance with therules and regulations of the PMCC.
2.Physicians (part-time) and Medical Specialists (part-time) may collect their respective professional fees above and beyond medicare fees subject to DOH-PMA guidelines.
3. All rules and regulations governing non-medicare ECO II, III and IV will also apply.

ANCILLARY SERVICE FOR PAYING PATIENTS (Medicare and Non-Medicare)
1. Payment of examinations performed by full time hospital personnel will go to the hospital.
2. All professional fees of part-time Medical Specialists shall be accordingly subject to the PMCC guideline and the DOH-PMA guideline.
3. The surgical pathologist (part-time) may charge professional fees for his professional services in the interpretation of histopath and cytological specimens.
4. Radiation therapists (part-time), ultrasound specialists (part-time) and nuclear medicine specialists (part-time) can charge professional fees.

OUT-PATIENT SERVICE
In the out-patient department (dispensary), all patients shall be subject to the classification by the hospital's Medical Social Service and shall be classified into:
1. Purely indigent
2. Partial pay
3. Full pay

A. The purely indigent patients do not required by the hospital fees and professional fee.
B. The partial pay patient shall be required by the hospital to pay a small amount for the use of the hospital facilities which will go into the hospital funds. These patients do not pay any professional fee for physicians.
C. The full pay patients will be attended to in a separate pay consultation area. Only Medical Specialists will be allowed in this pay area. All professional fees are subject to the DOH-PMA guideline. This patients will pay the hospital fee and the physician's professional fee. If the physician is on full time basis, then his professional fee will go to the hospital. If the physician/Medical Specialists is on part-time basis, he can collect his professional fee. All professional fees collected from full pay patients in the pay consultation area of the out-patient department are subject to the DOH-PMA professional fees guideline and the PMCC guideline whenever applicable.

4. PENALTY CLAUSE:
All Regional Directors and Chiefs of Hospitals concerned are directed to closely monitor the implementation of this new program. Part-time physicians and part-time Medical Specialists found guilty of abusing any of the above privileges and found to be negligent and ineffective in their official functions, duties and responsibilities to the hospital shall be stripped of these privileges of private practice and will be subject to administrative disciplinary action in accordance with the rules and regulations of theMinistry of Health and the Civil Service Commision.

This Order, being issued in the interest of theservice is hereby declared official, confirmed and made of record.
</body>

<sign>CLEMENTE S. GATMAITAN, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>