Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>04/28/1980</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 82 s. 1980</docnum>

TO: The Chiefs of Special Hospitals in the Metro Manila under the Office of the Minister

FROM: The Minister of Health

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Drug Procurement Procedures for Special Hospitals</subject>

<body>
Pursuant to the Presidential directive to reduce the cost of drugs purchased by the Ministry of Health to more reasonable levels without sacrificing quality, an Ad Hoc Committee was created to formulate procedures for drug procurement, recommend adequate safeguards and to set the rules for the proper implementation of the program on a phase by phase basis.

Accordingly, the following recommended procedures have been approved and will be implemented in the eight special hospitals effective the 3rd quarter of 1980. This will constitute the second phase of the revised drug procurement program of the Ministry that will eventually cover all its operating units in the Central Headquarters and the field agencies.

The following procedures shall therefore be strictly observed:

1. The Office of the Minister will distribute to the eight hospitals copies of the "List of Drugs for Secondary and Tertiary Health Care Levels" drawn up by the MOH Therapeutic Committee.

2. The hospitals will submit to the Office of the Minister their requisitions (RIVs) for drugs for the third quarter based on the abovementioned list on or before May 23, 1980. Subsequently, the hospitals will submit their requisitions at least 45 days before the start of the next quarter.

3. The Office of the Minister will review the requisitions submitted by the hospitals before approval by the undersigned.

4. If drugs are required in a hospital which are not included in the "List", the Therapeutic Committee of the hospital should state the justification for the use of such drugs.

5. The Office of the Minister will request the accredited drug firms to submit their quotations on the list of drugs required by the hospital.

6. The Office of the Minister will select the drug firms from which procurement of specific items will be made. Each drug firm will be informed within a reasonable period of the quantity of each item which should be delivered to each hospital.

7. Simultaneously, each hospital will be informed by the Office of the Minister of the name of the pharmaceutical firm, drug item, quantity and price approved for its purchase.

8. Purchase orders shall be prepared and approved by the chief of the hospital based on the approved price and quantity authorized by the Minister of Health. A copy of every purchase order issued shall be furnished by the hospital to the Office of the Minister for reference.

9. The hospital will give the approved purchase order to the drug firm concerned.

10. The drug firm will deliver to the hospital the drugs in the quantity appearing in the purchase order the reglamentary period.

11. The Food and Drug Administration, or any other laboratory duly authorized by the Minister of Health, will undertake testing of the drugs to determine compliance with required specifications.

12. The acceptance of the drugs by the hospital shall be witnessed by a representative of the COA.

13. The hospital shall process and approve the vouchers of accepted drugs accompanied by the necessary supporting papers.

14. The hospital will issue the corresponding check as payment for the drugs to the pharmaceutical firm.

15. The chief of hospital will submit to the Office of the Minister a summary report of the utilization of accepted drugs at the end of each quarter.

This Order takes effect upon approval.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>