Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>09/21/1981</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 8-A s. 1981</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines and related procedures for Accounting of funds allotted for the construction of Barangay Health Stations</subject>

<body>
To ensure smooth flow of transactions relative to disbursement/accounting of funds allotted for the construction of 915 Barangay Health Stations under the amended Loan Agreement No. 923 PH (Population Project II) this Administrative Order is hereby issued for the guidance of all concerned.

1.0 General Guidelines

1.1 Releases of allotments for the construction of Barangay Health Stations shall be taken up in the Accounting Division, Ministry of Health.

1.2 The Budget Division of the Ministry of Health shall prepare the request for Obligation of Allotment (ROA) to cover the cost of construction of a Barangay Health Stations.

1.3 Disbursement Voucher in favor of the Provincial Treasurer designated by the Minister of Finance shall likewise be prepared by the Budget Division (MOH), to cover the remittance of the allotted fund for the construction of the Barangay Health Stations.

1.4 The Accounting Division of the Ministry of Health shall obligate the funds and process the disbursement voucher. The transfer of cash allotment shall be treated in the books as “Prepayment”.

1.5 Check received by the Provincial Treasurer from the MOH shall be deposited in an authorized depository bank as a trust fund.

1.6 Incurrence of expenditures out of the funds shall be in accordance with the disbursement procedure, discussed in 2.2 hereof.

1.7 Expenditures incurred for the construction of the Barangay Health Stations shall be paid thru checks by the treasurer concerned against trust deposits.

1.8 The Provincial Treasurer, upon approval of the Minister of Finance shall transfer to the Municipal Treasurer the amount due the Barangay Health Station which are beyond commutable distance from the Office of the Provincial Treasurer. Checks received by Municipal Treasurer shall likewise be deposited into a trust deposit account.

1.9 All payrolls/payments shall be approved by the MHO/PHO concerned. The PHO shall be the approving official for disbursement made by Provincial Treasurer and likewise the MHO shall be the approving official for disbursement made by the Municipal Treasurer.

2.0 Procedure in the transfer/disbursement of funds:

2.1 For transfer of funds to Provincial Treasurer.

2.1.1 Barangay officials request the Minister of Health thru channels for the transfer of funds for the construction of BHS to Provincial Treasurer nearest the Barangay.

2.1.2 The Minister of Health recommends for approval to the Minister of Finance the designation of the Provincial Treasurer as Special Disbursing Officer for the purpose.

2.1.3 With the designation of Provincial Treasurer, the Central Office MOH prepares Disbursement Voucher and check in accordance with standard operating procedures and accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

2.1.4 The Ministry of Health releases the check payable to the Provincial Treasurer. An advice of the transfer is sent to the Regional Coordinator.

2.1.5 Transfer of funds from the Provincial Treasurer to the Municipal Treasurer when authorized by the Ministry of Finance shall be in accordance with existing rules and regulations and prescribed accounting procedures.

2.1.6 Funds transferred to Municipal Treasurer shall remain as accountability of the Provincial Treasurer transferring same insofar as the Ministry of Health is concerned.

2.2 For disbursement of funds for construction material.

2.2.1 The Barangay Captain prepares requisition and issue voucher to cover all materials needed in the construction based on the MOH specifications.

2.2.2 The Provincial Health Officer/Municipal Health Officer approves the requisition and forwards papers to the Municipal Development Council.

2.2.3 The Municipal Development Council authorized representative prepares the canvass papers and purchase orders for the materials needed to be approved by the PHO/MHO.

2.2.4 The Barangay Captain receives construction materials in the presence of a Commission on Audit Representative and signs Cert. No. 1 of the disbursement voucher prepared by the MDC.

2.2.5 The MDC authorized representative recommends the approval of the voucher by signing certificate No. 3.

2.2.6 The voucher is forwarded to the Provincial/Municipal Treasurer who signs Cert. No. 4.

2.2.7 The PHO/MHO approves disbursement voucher signing certificate No. 5 and returns approved voucher to the Provincial Treasurer/Municipal Treasurer.

2.2.8 The Provincial/Municipal Treasurer shall prepare check in accordance with existing accounting and Auditing rules and regulations and pay claimants.

2.3 Procedures for disbursement of funds for payrolls of construction workers.

2.3.1 The Barangay Captain and the MDC authorized representative sign labor contracts and forward contracts to PHO/MHO for approval.

2.3.2 The PHO/MHO forwards contract to the MDC for payroll preparation.

2.3.3 The Barangay Captain certifies the payroll that services have been duly rendered. The MDC authorized representative approves the payment thereof.

3.0 Reporting Requirement

3.1 When there are transferred funds to Municipal Treasurers, Municipal Treasurers involved shall submit to the Provincial Treasurer reports of Disbursements duly approved by MHO covering each quincena. Disbursement voucher shall be in triplicate and supported by check stubs, three copies each of invoices, purchase orders, requisition issue voucher and contracts with suppliers if there are any. Creditors portion of the voucher shall be signed by payee. The municipal Treasurer shall likewise furnish the Provincial Treasurer within 3 days after the end of each month the status of Trust Deposit Account using the enclosed form. Disbursement reports are due 5 days after the end of each quincena.

3.2 Provincial Treasurer shall prepare a report of disbursements on a quincena basis to the Project Coordinator. Said disbursement shall likewise be supported by documents enumerated in 3.1.

3.3 Disbursement Reports of Municipal Treasurer, in case of transferred funds, and disbursements by Provincial Treasurer shall be consolidated in one disbursement report to be submitted by the Provincial Treasurer to the Project Coordinator in the MOH, with all supporting documents not later than the 10th day after the end of each quincena.

3.4 The Provincial Treasurer shall submit monthly status of the Trust Deposit Account to the Project Coordinator using the enclosed form not later than the fifth day of ensuing month. Funds transferred to Municipal Treasurer shall be included in the monthly status report.

3.5 The Provincial Treasurer shall submit to the Project Coordinator, Ministry of Health, the certification of completion of Barangay Captain and certification of the Municipal Development Council on the expenditures incurred in the construction within 15 days after the turn-over. These documents as verified by the Auditor shall support account in the books of Ministry of Health and adjust the prepayment account so as to charge the expenditures against the proper account.

This Order shall take effect immediately. Strict compliance with the above guidelines is enjoined of all concerned.
</body>

<sign>J. C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>Ministry of Health</signtitle>
