Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

<date>04/30/1981</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 129-A s. 1981</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on disbursement of funds and prescribing the accounting procedures and financial reporting system for the approved activities of the Training Component under the Philippine Population Project II.</subject>

<body>
For the proper and uniform implementation of the sub-allotment of fund under Population Loan II Project, the following procedures shall be observed by all concerned:

I. Accounting Procedure on the Regional Level

1. Advice of sub-allotment shall be released by the Financial and Management Service of this Ministry based on the approved program of activities per quarter.

2. Advice of sub-allotment and CDC under this Project shall be governed by Budget Circular No. 246 dated June 30, 1975 and COA Circular No. 79-116 (LOI 925) dated September 11, 1979, respectively.

3. Separate sets of books (General Ledger, JCI, JDDO, JCD, General Journal, etc.) shall be maintained by the regional office of this specific project.

4. Separate series of TCAA checks shall be used to distinguish disbursements made from other regular activities.

5. Duplicate copies of journal vouchers drawn to book up releases, deposits and disbursements must be forwarded to the Central Office, Accounting Division, together with the duplicate report of disbursements and validated remittance advices.

6. Deposits of collection to the National Treasury shall be accounted under 71-199-3. Agency code and Fund code to be used in the remittance advice shall be 5619 and 102, respectively.

7. The Regional Office must submit to the Central Office their financial reports together with two (2) copies of the voucher and duplicate or xerox with its supporting documents in connection with the purchase of gasoline, supplies, etc. and a listing of personnel with regards to transportation/traveling expense voucher, duly certified by the Regional Accountant (see attached form).

II. Disbursement of Fund

a. The entire program of activities under this project except those of the Family Planning, shall be processed and paid by the regular staff of the Regional Health Office in accordance with established accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

b. Cash Advance for Family Planning Training

1. Funds for training activities including project administration cost and traveling expenses shall be issued in the form of cash advance.

2. The Disbursing Officer and/or the Medical Services Supervisor II shall be designated as Special Disbursing Officer authorizing them to hold cash advance.

3. Based on the approved RFAU Program of Activities, the Regional Health Office shall issue cash advances to the designated Special Disbursing Officers and furnish them a copy of the approved ROA.

4. The RFAU Accountant shall maintain the necessary control and subsidiary records, process vouchers, certify the availability of fund using the obligation number of the ROA furnished by the RHO, and observe the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

5. Within ten (10) days after the end of each training course or at the end of the fiscal year, the designated special disbursing officer shall submit to the Regional Health Office a report of disbursement (Gen. Form No. 954) with three (3) copies of the vouchers including the original and the supporting documents. Duplicate of said papers shall be retained at the RFAU for its file. Unexpended balance of cash advance for any given period shall be deducted from subsequent cash advances. However, unexpended balance of cash advance at the end of the year shall be refunded immediately to the Regional Health Office.

6. The RFAU Accountant shall submit to the Regional Health Office the monthly statement of Operation and Cash Utilization on the 10th of the following month with a copy thereof furnished the National Family Planning Office.

This Order shall take effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE M. GARCIA, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
