Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila
 

<date>29/12/1982</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 51-A, s.1982</docnum>
 

<subject>
 
Subject: Rules and Regulations for the accreditation of an Urban Pest Control Operator.</subject>

<body>
Pursuant to P.D. 856, the Code on Sanitation and the provisions of the Memorandum o£ Agreement entered into and signed between the Ministry of Health (MOH) and the Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority (EPA) on
July l5, 1980, he MOH shall accredit all government and commercial urban pest control operators.

The objective of such accreditation is to protect and promote public health, ensure proper control and supervision over urban pest control operators, both commercial and government and to ensure further that all official transactions made by this Ministry, all its agencies, as well as private institutions shall only be with legitimate pest control operators. 

CHAPTER I
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS.

1. Building - shall mean any structure adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering of professional service, for storage of pesticides, equipment or for the performance of work or labor, including office building and other structure on premises used for business purposes.

2. Urban Pest Control Operator — shall mean any person or group of person, firm or entity, registered, licensed and accredited to perform or undertake pest control in any building, structure, food establishments within a locality, municipality or city

 

h. Pest - shall mean any arthropod, rodent or any living organisms either plant or animal, which by its presence in, on or near, may annoy, be noxious or endanger the health, safety, comfort and well-being of human life or cause damage to property.

5. Vermin - a group of insects or small animals such as flies, mosquitoes, cockroaches, flies, lice, bedbugs, mice and rats which are vectors of diseases and nuisance to people.

6. "Applicators", etc.,, shall constitute the following:

(1.) Certified applicator means any individual who is certified or authorized to use or supervise the use of any pesticide which is classified for restricted use.
(2.) "Commercial applicator" means any person who enters into a contract or an agreement for the sale of monetary payment and agrees to perform a service by applying any pesticide or servicing any device but shall not include a farmer trading work with another.

(3.) “Private applicator” means a certified applicator who uses or supervises the use of any pesticide which is classified for restricted use for purposes of producing by any agricultural commodity on property owned or rented by him or his employer or (if applied without compensation other than trading of personal services between producers of agricultural commodities) on the property of another person.

 

7. Ministry or Heath herein referred to as the Accreditation Committee

Chapter II - Registration and Accreditation of Urban Pest Control

Section 1. Any person, firm, entity or corporation, desiring to undertake or operate pest or vermin control and who possess a license as a commercial applicator by the Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority and having complied with the requirement herein set forth shall be accredited as such by the Ministry of Health accreditation Committee, provided the pesticides used sha11 have been previously registered with the Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority.

	The application shall be in the prescribed form as prepared and adapted by the Ministry of Health. The MOH Accreditation Committee shall review and examine the application and inspect the firm or entity for recommendation and approval by the Minister of Health or his duly authorized representative.

Physical facilities of the establishment shall strictly comply with the provisions of P.D. 856 otherwise known as the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines, particularly Chapter VII Section 45, a,c,d, e,g,h, h7, a-l, a—2, a—6, b-l, Sec. 48 — e, f—l, f-2,-Sec. h9, a, b, d, Chapter xvii, Sections 71 and 72, and Chapter xx - Section 88, a,b, f, and g.

Section 2. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to establish or operate any Urban Pest Control business in the Philippines shall submit to the Ministry .Of Health Committee on Accreditation for Urban Pest
Central an application in the prescribed application form (Annex I) containing the following data and supported by the following documents:
1. Name of firm.
2. Name of President/General Manager/owner, citizenship, domicile and business address
3. Scope and nature of services offered, and names of accredited personnel to perform the job
4. Specific procedure and method services
5. Equipment, facilities, transport, manpower to be utilized and available for the service.

6. Submit Xerox copies of the following documents:
(a.) Certificate of registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(b.) Articles of Incorporation and by-laws
(c.) Certificate o registration with the Bureau of Internal Revenue
(d.) Certificate of Registration with the Bureau of Domestic Trade
(e.) Privilege tax receipts of payment.
(f.) Confirmation letter from the Bureau of Internal Revenue
(g.) Financial statement certified by licensed C.P.A.
(h.) Credit line if any
(i.) A certification from F.P.A. that pesticides to be used has been registered.
(j.) License as a Pest Control Operator from the Fertilizer and Pesticides Authority or Certificate of Training for government personnel engage in Pest Control
(k.) Current income tax return and official receipt of payment.
(l.) Mayor’s permit and municipal or city license
(m.) Tax clearance from the BIR.
(n.) Medical Certificate from any authorized physician of the Ministry of Health attesting to the physical fitness of all personnel of the applicant.

CHAPTER III – Required Training for Accreditation
	The Accreditation Committee shall require training of urban pest control operators by the Ministry of Health and Fertilizer & Pesticide Authority. Safety program and first side courses shall be components of this training for accreditation

Chapter IV – Fees
Section 1 – Application Fee. The sum of Fifty Pesos (P50.00) shall be collected as application fee from an applicant

Section 2 - Accreditation Fee. The sum of Two hundred Pesos (P200.0O) shall be collected as accreditation fee from any operator who is duly accredited by the Committee on Accreditation of Urban Pest Control, and a renewal fee of P100.00 per annum.

Chapter V – Exhibition of Certificate of Accreditation

The Certificate of Accreditation of the Urban Pest Control operator shall be displayed in the establishment’s office in a conspicuous place.
	Accreditation of Urban Pest Control operator shall be non-transferable.
	Chapter VI – Validity, Renewal, Revocation, Consolation of Certificate
Section 1. The initial accreditation of an urban pest control operator shall be valid for a period of one year up to the last day of December of the year stated therein.
Section 2. Application for renewal shall be filed during the last two months of the period. Subsequent renewals shall be for three year periods provided no deficiencies/violations have occurred/have been committed.

Section 3.' The Certificate of Accreditation may be revoked and/or cancelled at any time by Minister of Health or his duly authorized representative for vio1ation of these rules and regulations.

Chapter VII
General Health Provision 

(1.) Handlers and operators shall undergo a periodic health check-up at the firms/operator's expense.

(2.) No person shall be assigned to work requiring respirators unless a government physician has determined his physical fitness to perform the work with the use of the respirator.

(3.) There shall be no poison baits exposed in food processing establishments, food storage and other places serving food

(4.) Spraying shall be done only on approved and defined sprayable surfaces or areas. Praying shall not be done on:
	a. toys
	b. Playpens
	c. Religious images
	d. Sacred objects
	e. Domestic Animals

Repealing Clause

All orders end circulars or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby amended and/or repelled.

This Order shall take effect 1mmedietely.

   
     
    
     

 

 

 

 

</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>