

Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila
 

<date>19/8/1982</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 42, s.1982</docnum>
<subject> Subject : REGULATION PART c-10: DRUGS REGISTRATION or HERBAL AND/0R TRADITIONAL DRUGS BOTH LOCAL AND IMPORTED</subject>


<body>

C-10.0 Republic Act 3720, otherwise known as Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, states among other things that the policy of the state is to ensure safe and good quality supply of drugs and to regulate the manufacture sale and traffic of same to protect the health of the people. For the proper implementation of the above policy, the following rules and regulations governing the registration and Sale of herbal and/or traditional drugs both local and imported is adopted in order to ensure the quality and safety of the drug supply in the industry.

 
10.1 Herbal and/or traditional drug means:

1. Articles recognized in the Philippine National Formulary

2. Articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man.

3. Articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of mane

4. Articles intended for use as a component of any article specified in clause (1) (2) or (3)

 
lO.2 Herbal and/or traditional drugs shall be distributed and sold only after having been duly registered with the Food and- Drug Administration.

10.3 No herbal and/or traditiona1 drug shall be accepted for registration from any applicant unless such applicant is a holder of-a current permit issued by the Food and Drug Administration to engage in the manufacture, importation, sale or distribution of such herbal and/or traditional drugs

10.4 a) Application for registration of locally manufactured herbal and/or traditional drug shall be submitted to the FDA by the manufacturer or his duly authorized representative.

1b) Application for registration of a foreign manufactured herbal and/or traditional drug shall be submitted to 'the FDA by the importer or his duly authorized representative.

c) Where an herbal and/or traditional drug is not manufactured by the business firm or person appearing on the label, the application for registration of said drug shall be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration by the manufacturer.

10.5 The application for registration of herbal and/or traditional drug both local and imported shall be accompanied by the following requirements.

a) For locally manufactured herbal and/or traditional drug.

Section A. 1. Application letter from the manufacturer
2. Full list and amount of.a11 ingredients used as component of the finished product.
3. Technical-specification of all the ingredient used as component
4. Technical specification or description of the finished drug product

5. Labels, labeling materials, package insert brochures and other advertising materials to be used with the drug product

b) For foreign manufactured herbal and/or traditional drug product 

1. Application letter from importer attesting importation of the drug product
2. Government certificate of clearance, acceptance or registry and free sale from the country of origin and duly authenticated by the territorial Philippine Consulate
3. Government certificate attesting the status of the manufacturer, competency and reliability of the personnel and facilities and duly authenticated by territorial Philippine Consulate
4. Same requirements enumerated is locally manufactured herbal and/or traditional drug product

Section B
1. Oral LD50 is rate
2. Pharmacologic studies 
3. Mutagenicity studies
	a) in-vitro 
	b) in-vivo
4. Data on safety and efficacy
5. Dosage formulation

 

Section C. Quality Control Requirements (FDA Analysis)

1. Tests for the presence of synthetic drugs:
a) Aspirin
b)Acetaminophen
c) Dipyrone
d) Phenylbutazone
e) Pyrazolone
f) Corticosteroid
g) Anabolic steroids
h) Gonadal hormones

2. Test for the presence of heavy metals

a) lead

b) mercury
c) arsenic
d) cadmium

3. Test for alcohol content should not be more than 10%

4. Analysis for impurities
5. Tablets

a) Weight Variation

b) Disintegration

c) Dissolution for pure active ingredient
d) Content uniformity
e) Hardness

6. Liquids, suspensions, or syrups

a) Suspendibility
b) Homogeneity

c) Viscosity 

d) Standard plate count

e) Coliform count

f) Yeast count and mold count

7. Ointments, Creams and other Semi-Solid Preparation
a) Impalpability
b) Homogeneity
c) Melting Point
d) Sterility for ophthalmic preparations

8. Suppositories and pessaries
	a) melting point

10.6 Where a drug or pharmaceutical specialty is to be distributed and sold in several of presentation of dosage but under one designation only, separate registration in respect to each form shall be made.

10.7 Where the application for registration satisfies the requirements stated in Sec. 10.5 and evaluation by experts showed safety, efficacy and dosage of the herbal and/or traditional drug product, the Food and Drug Administration shall enter the drug product in the official registry and shall inform the applicant of the registration number.
10.8 In addition to the requirements of Sec. 18 & 19 of RA 3720, the registration number shall be printed on the label of the herbal and/or traditional drug after it is officially registered with the Food and Drug Administration;

10.9 Initial registration fee:
a) Drug preparation containing only one active ingredient shall be charged a fee of fifty pesos (P50.00)

b) Those containing more than one active ingredient shall be charged a fee of one hundred pesos (P100.00).

10.10 The initial registration of an herbal and/or traditional drug product shall be valid only for one (1) year from the date of release to be renewed yearly.

10.11 The registration of an herbal and/or traditional drug product shall be considered not effective or cancelled.

a) If the holder of the registration number so request; or
b) If the holder of the registration number failed to renew the registration of such herbal and/or traditional drug pursuant to Sec. 10.10; or
c) If the holder of the registration number advertised or promoted the herbal and/or traditional drug not in-accordance with the particular submitted, pursuant to Section 10.5
d) If new development, findings or public interest and protection may so warrant such cancellation

e) If the composition or labeling of the herbal and/or traditional drug had been modified without authorization of the Food and Drug Administration;

f) If the herbal and/or traditional drug product is manufactured by a firm who is not a holder of a current permit issued by the Food and Drug
Administration to engage in the manufacture of the drug product,

 
10.12 Any herbal and/or traditional drug product whose registration is not renewed subsequently shall be subject to a new registration requirement specified on Section 10.5 and 10,9 of this regulations, when it is re—introduced for sale.

10.13 Any herbal and/or traditional drug, the registration of which is not intended to be renewed may be given extension of not more than six months after the expiry date of such registration, for the purpose of exhausting the remaining stock in the markets;

  
10.14 Misbranding by reference to registration: Any representation that creates an impression of official endorsement because of registration will be considered misleading.

10.15 This order shall take effect immediately.

 
</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
