Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>13/6/1984</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 87A, s. 1984</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Implementing Details on Personal Action at the Regional Level relative to the Reorganization of the Ministry of Health under Executive Order No. 851.</subject>


<body>
In line with the provisions of Executive Order No. 851, dated December 2, 1982, reorganizing the Ministry of Health, the following implementing details are hereby prescribed for the guidance of the Regional Health Offices and the Integrated Provincial Health Offices on personnel actions upon approval of the staffing pattern under the said Executive Order:

I. Require all officials and employees who will be re-appointed to submit new CSC Form 212 (Personal Data Sheet) and other supporting papers, for the preparation of their new appointments

II. Issue new appointments to FHOs, Assistant FHOs and CHOs paid from national funds. Their appointments shall be recommended by the Regional Director for approval of the Minister of Health. The appointment shall be at large, for assignment in any province in the region.

III. Issue new appointments to Chief of Medical Centers and Director and Regional Hospital to be recommended by the Regional Director for the approval of the Minister of Health.

IV. Issue new appointments to Chiefs of District Hospitals to be recommended by the Regional Health Director and for approval of the Minister of Health. Their appointments shall indicate the Integrated PHO where the position will be aligned. 

V. Issue new appointments to Medical Specialist III (Public Health) and other key positions to IPHO. Their appointments shall be recommended by the PHO, and the Regional Director concerned for approval of the Minister of Health. Their appointments shall indicate the IPHO where the position will be assigned.

VI. Issue new appointments to other officials and employees whose positions have been upgraded, reclassified, absorbed by the regional office, regional hospital, IPHO, or district hospital. This action shall be in addition to issuing appointments to new personnel in the revised staffing pattern.
VII. Personnel section shall be initiated at the level where Personnel/Organizational changes occur: e.g., for regional mental hospital employees – t the regional hospital level: for vertical personnel absorbed in the IPHO – at the IPHO level: for rural health physicians integrated at the district hospital – at the district hospital level.

VIII. New appointments shall reflect the new position title and salary of the incumbent and shall be accompanied by the correspond1nr Job Description Form to be signed by the Officials concerned and prepared by the Personnel Section.

1X. Appointments shall take effect upon approval of the staffing pattern under the reor3anized setup for those already performing the duties of the position, or upon entrance to duty for new appointees

X. For appointment to positions to be signed by the Regional Health Directors under delegated authority the name of the PHO or that of the Chief, Regional Hospital, shall appear on the face of the appointment as the recommending official, whichever is applicable

XI. New appointments shall be issued to resident physicians in the Provincial Hospital component of the IPHO covered by the Residency Training Law (P.D. 1424). These appointments shall be either permanent or temporary depending on the nature of their performance. Nevertheless, they shall continue with the requirements of their particular areas of residency service – STATUS QUO


XII No new appointment: need to be issued to resident physicians covered by the Residency Trainin3 Law in regional hospitals/medical centers in the regions due to the re-organization. Such appointments shall be issued for the renewal of their tenure of residency depending on their performance.

XIII. All other appo1ntmrnts be3ond the delegated authority of the Regional Health Directors, shall be forwarded to the Office the Minister, with the recommendation of the Regional Director and the PHO/Chief, Regional Hospital, whichever is applicable.

 XIV. Since this is a re-organization, no new appointments shall be issued to any official or employee with pending administrative charges on grave misconduct where evidence of guilt is reasonably strong or whose suspension for such grave misconduct has been directed by the proper authorities, including the Tanodbayan.
XV. Notices shall be issued to all those officials and employees who will not be re-appointed due to lack of qualifications or whose positions have been phased out.
XVI. Incumbents of positions which have been phased out or abolished in reorganization, provided that they are qualified and performance-oriented, shall be given priority consideration for re-appointment
.
XVII. Provide immediate assistance to those who will be phased out or will not be re-appointed for the processing of their terminal leave applications and retirement gratuities, as well as other government benefits.
XVIII. Submit a list of those phased out or not re-appointed officials and employees to the Office of the Minister for appropriate action and decision.
This order shall take effect upon its approval. 
 

 

 
</body>
<sign>J.C. Azurin</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>
