     

Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>9/2/1984</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 82, s. 1984</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Amendment of Administrative Order No. 102 dated September 22,1980</subject>

<body>
  	The implementation of the provisions of Executive Order No.851 dated December 2, 1982, on the integration of health and medical services at the field operations level require amendment of MOH Administrative Order No. 102 dated September 22, 1980 in order to clarify the policy on the designation of Officers in charge of Integrated Provincial Health Offices and Hospitals under this Office.
	Accordingly, for the information, guidance and strict compliance of all concerned, Administrative Order No. 102 dated September 22, 1980 is hereby amended to read as follows:

	1. Whenever the Provincial Health Officer of the Integrated Provincial Health Officer or the Chief of District/municipal Hospital has to transact official business outside of his official station, or to transact business outside of his official station, or go on leave of absence, the next ranking official shall be recommended as Officer-in-charge to the Regional Health Director.

	2. When the duration of absence, whether official or personal, is less than fifteen (15) days, the next ranking official shall be automatically designated as Officer-in-charge. He shall perform only routinely duties which excludes appointments, approval of requisitions/purchases, orders, detail of personnel and disbursements in excess of authority delegated to them under existing issuances.
	3. When the period covered by the absence is beyond the above mentioned period, adequate authority to act on all technical, financial and administrative matters shall be delegated to whoever is designated as Officer in charge of the Integrated Provincial Health Office or District/Municipal Hospital by the Regional Health Director
	4. Whenever the next ranking official in the Office is not recommended as Officer in charge, the provincial Health Officer or Chief of the District/Municipal Hospital shall submit his reasons in writing to the Regional Health Director for his decision.
	5. In the event that the Regional Health Director, for some valid reasons, cannot act on the recommendation of the Provincial Health Officer, or Chief of the District Hospital, he shall submit the matter immediately, together with his comments, to the Ministry of Health for his decision.
	6. In case of the retirement of the Provincial Health Officer, or Chief of Hospital, or whenever the interest of the service so requires the Regional Health Director may designate the Officer in charge from among the ranking officials in other organizational units within the Region.
	7. In the case of the Regional Hospitals or Medical Centers under the Regional Health Office, the Regional Director shall designate the Officer in charge thereof when the Chief of Hospital is on leave of absence, on training grant, or on official travel abroad or retired
	8. In the case of the Special Hospitals or Medical centers under the office of the Minister, the Minister of Health shall exercise the discretionary authority, as the interest of the service may warrant, of the designating the Officer in Charge thereof free from other organizational units of the Ministry.
	
    For the purpose of exercising authorities delegated under Existing issuances, the clause “in the absence of” is hereby interpreted to mean:
	1. When the Officer is on approved vacation or sick leave of absence, with or without pay;
	2. when the Officer is on official travel outside of the country for a period of fifteen (15) days or more;
	3. When the Officer is taking up post graduate studies as an official study grantee of the Ministry of Health
	4. When the Officer is undergoing in/service training or attending any seminar workshop on full time basis for a period of fifteen (15) days or more.
	This Order takes effect immediately and supersedes any and all orders inconsistent herewith.

	
  
 
 
By the authority of Minister of Health:

</body>
<sign>ANTONIO N. ACOSTA</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Deputy Minister, Officer-in-charge</signtitle>
