Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>23/10/1985</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 135,s. 1985</docnum>


<subject>Subject: Revised Guidelines and related procedures for the construction of POP II Barangay Health Stations.</subject>

<body>

To strengthen the Primary Health Care, Family Planning, and Nutrition Services of the government, 915 Barangay Health Stations shall be conducted as provided under Development Credit Agreement No. 923 PH (Population Project II). For ease of reference and guidance of all concerned in the program, this Administrative Order is being issued.

1. General Guidelines
	1.1 The construction of Barangay Health Stations shall be a collaborative undertaking among the Ministry of Health, the local Barangay Officials and Barangay Primary Health Care Committee (BPHCC).
	1.2 The location of the Barangay Health Station in a municipality shall be identified by the Ministry of Health thru the Rural Health Unit and BPHCC based on set criteria. (see Annex "B")
	1.3 Final site of the Barangay Health Station shall be determined by the Barangay Officials and the BPHCC in consultation with the Municipal Health Officer and Provincial Health Officer and to be confirmed by the CWIO.
	1.4 Lots donated by private person or from government entity once chosen as site of Barangay Heath Station shall be property of the Ministry of Health.
	1.5 The Ministry of Health shall fund the construction thru the provincial Hospital Cashier/District Hospital Cashier who shall disburse funds due the BPHCC and all its creditors.
	1.6 Construction program on a bayanihan concept shall be encouraged to ensure community participation in the construction and maintenance of the Barangay Health Station.
	1.7 The Regional Health Director shall be the overall Regional Coordinator of the program assisted by the Regional PHC Coordinator while the Provincial Health Officer shall be the Provincial Coordinator of the program in their respective areas, assisted by the Provincial PHC Coordinator.

2. Standard Procedure in the construction of Barangay Health Stations.
	2.1 Pre-Construction Phase-
	2.1.1 The staff of the RHU shall be responsible for the social preparation with the support of the Barangay and Municipal PHC Committees
	2.1.2 The staff of the RHU shall submit a report on the result of the social preparation to the Provincial Coordinator thru channels.
	2.1.3 The Barangay Council/BPHCC shall pass a Commitment Resolution (CR) with a pledge of support of the construction/maintenance of the Barangay Health Station.
	2.1.4 Signed Resolution shall be submitted by the Barangay Council/BPHCC to the Regional Coordinator thru channels within 10 days after adoption of the resolution.
	2.1.5 Barangay Captain/BPHCC Chairman shall submit deeds of donation/evidence of ownership to the Regional Coordinator through channels within 30 days from the acceptance of the program.
	2.1.6 The Regional Coordinator shall instruct the Civil work Implementation Officer (CWIO) or any Civil Engineer within his jurisdiction to conduct ocular inspection and evaluation of the site and submit their evaluation within 10 days from receipt of instruction.
	2.1.7 The regional Coordinator shall evaluate all documents and reports of the RHU staff and the CWIO and if favorable, recommend to the Civil Works Coordinator, the inclusion of the Barangay to the Program together with all supporting documents.
	2.1.8 The provincial Coordinator shall cause the immediate transfer of title of land to the Ministry of Health.
	2.1.9 Upon receipt of the title documents relative to the site, the Project coordinator shall transfer funds for the construction to the Provincial Hospital/District Hospital in the form of funding check to the credit of the depository bank of the Provincial Health Office/District Hospital advising the Provincial Coordinator and the Regional Coordinator of said transfer.

2.2 Construction phase
	2.2.1 The Provincial Coordinator shall inform the Barangay Officials/BPHCC thru the Municipal Primary Health Care Committee of the transfer and availability of funds to initiate construction.
	2.2.2 Barangay officials/BPHCC shall initiate the construction and procurement of materials needed for the Barangay Health Station. The civil Works Implementation Officer will provide technical assistance to the Barangay.
	2.2.3 The Municipal Health Office with the assistance of the CWIO shall confirm actual materials used, labor and other construction accomplishments. Payment shall be in accordance with the guidelines and related procedures for accounting of funds allotted for the construction of BHS, Administrative Order No. 134, and s. 1985.
	2.2.4 Construction should be completed preferably within 45 days after receipt by the community of construction materials and in no case should the period exceed 60 days reckoned from date of mobilization.
	2.2.5 The CWIO shall confirm the completion of the BHS before actual turnover and occupancy of the structure is authorized. Further, he shall submit the Certificate of Acceptance and Turnover (CAT) to the Project Coordinator through channels.

2.3 Post-construction Phase - 
	2.3.1 The provincial Hospital/District Hospital Center shall submit report of disbursement to the Project Coordinator (MOH) through the Regional Coordinator.
	2.3.2 Savings realized from the excess of the funds provided by the MOH over the cost of Barangay Council/BPHCC for any health-related development activities.
	2.3.3 The Barangay Council/BPHCC shall ensure the satisfactory operation and maintenance of the completed BHS.
	Strict compliance with the above guidelines and procedures is enjoined of all concerned.
	This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>  
<sign>J.C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health </signtitle>
