Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>23/4/1985</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 114,s. 1985</docnum>


<subject>SUBJECT : Implementing Details For the New Staffing Patterns of the Minister of Health under E.O. 851</subject>


<body>
Pursuant to Executive order No. 851 dated December 2, 1982, reorganizing the Ministry of Health and in V1ew of the approval of the new staffing pattern of this Office by the office of Budget and Management, the following rules and. guidelines are hereby issued for the proper implementation of the reorganization:

Section I. Health Education and Manpower Development Service 

1.1 The Health Education and Manpower Development Service shall assume the functions of the Office of Health Education and Personnel Training and those of the Medical Manpower Development Committee, both of which are hereby abolished. 

1.2 The HEMDS shall be responsible for the implementation of the Rural Health Practice Program.

1. 3 The names shall absorb applicable functions, appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary of the abolished units.

Section II. Bureau of Food and Drugs 

2.1 The newly created Bureau of Food and Drugs shall assume the functions of- the Food and Drug Administration which is hereby abolished. The functions to be assumed by the Bureau shall not include those previous functions the Narcotic Drugs Division of the Food and Drug Administration which have already been assumed by the Dangerous Drugs Board.

2.2 The Bureau shall also have the authority to prescribe the general standards and guidelines with respect to the veracity of nutritional and medicinal claims in the advertisement of food, drugs and cosmetics in the various media, to monitor such advertisements, and to call upon any erring manufacturer, distributor, or advertiser to desist from inaccurate or misleading nutritional or medicinal claims to their advertising. Should such manufacturer, distributor or advertiser refuse or fail to obey the desistance order issued by the Bureau, he shall be subject to applicable penalties as may be prescribed by law and regulations,

Section III. Bureau of Quarantine

3.1 The Bureau of Quarantine, a line Bureaus, shall continue to perform its present functions, including supervision over rat—proof zones in designated international ports and airports and over medical examination of aliens for immigration purposes.

Section IV. Line Functions in the National Capital Region

4.1 The following staff bureaus and special projects may, upon authority of the Minister, directly exercise line functions in the National Capital Region until such time that the regional office of the Ministry for the National Capital Region has been established: Provided, that such positions as are created to perform such line functions shall be transferred to the NOE Office after its creation:

a. Bureau of Dental Health Services
b. Bureau of Food and Drugs
c. Bureau of Health Services
d. Bureau of Medical Services
e. Bureau of Research and Laboratories
f. Cancer Control Center
g. Dermatology Research and Training Service
h. Family Planning Service
i. Malaria Eradication Service
j. Nutrition Service
k.Radiological Health Service
l. Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service

Section V. Medical Centers, Special Hospitals and Research Institute

5.1 The Minister of Health shall exercise supervising and control over the following medical centers, special hospitals and the research institute:

a. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center
b. Rizal Medical Center
c. Hospital ng Bagong Lipunan
d. Jose Fabella Memorial Hospital
e. National Children's Hospital

f. National Mental Hospital

g. National Orthopedic Heepital

h. Quirino Memorial General Hospital

i. San Lazaro Hospital

j. Research Institute for Tropical Medicine

5.2 Medical centers and regional hospitals which are not listed above and which are located outside of Metro Manila shall be under the supervision and control of the Regional Health Director concerned.

Section VI. Administrative Supervision

6.1 The Minister shall exercise administrative supervision over the following entities:

a. Dangerous Drugs Board
b. Schistosomiasis Control Council
c. Philippine Medical Care Commission

Section VII. Attached Corporation

7.1 The Tondo Medical Center shall be attached to the Ministry of Health for policy and program coordination.

Section VIII. Regional Health Offices

8.1 The Regional Health Office shall have supervision and control over the following:

a. Medical Center(s) in the Region

b. Regional Hospital

c. Sanitaria in the Region

d. Provincial Health Offices

e. City Health Officers paid from national funds

8.2 The line functions of the Family Planning Service, the Malaria Eradication Service, the Nutrition Service and the Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service shall be integrated into the-appropriate units of the Regional Health Office, including applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary.

 
Section IX. Medical Centers in the Region and Regional Hospitals

9.1. The Regional Hospital shall have, as part of its integrated facilities, such regional laboratories and regional mental hospital as may exist in the region, subject to the following provision: the Regional Laboratory shall be transferred to and be made part of either the Regional Hospital or the Medical Center in the Region, whichever is nearer in location, including applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary except the following: 
a. The Regional Mental Hospital, Region IV, which has been absorbed by the Integrated Provincial Health Office of Cavite.

b. The Regional Laboratory, Region V, which has been absorbed by the Integrated Provincial Health Office of Albay.

Section X. Provincial Health Offices

10.1  The Provincial Health Office and the Provincial Hospital shall be merged to constitute a new Provincial Health Office. The new Provincial Health Office shall be responsible for the complete integration of the promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative components of health care delivery provided by the national government.

10.2. The New Provincial Health Office shall perform the following functions:

a. Administer and coordinate all health and medical activities in the province;

b. Exercise supervision and control over the district hospitals, municipal hospitals and other field units within the province provided by the national government, except those placed directly under the Office of the Minister or the Regional Health Office.

c. Exercise technical supervision over locally funded health services within the province;

d. Maintain and operate a health information system;
e. Coordinate with other national and local governments, including non—governmental organizations involved in health and health related activities within the province;


f. Exercise financial management over resources allocated to the province from national local or foreign sources in accordance with approved health plans, subject to existing accounting and auditing regulations; and

g. Perform such other functions as may be provided by law or expressly delegated by higher authorities.

10.3. The functions of the Family Planning Service, Malaria Eradication Service, Nutrition Service and the Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service, insofar as they pertain to field Operations shall be integrated into the Provincial Health Office, except the Schistosomiasis Hospital, Region VIII, which shall continue to be under the direct supervision and control of the Office of the Minister, through the Schistosomiasis Control and Research Service. The integration shall include applicable appropriations, records, equipment, property and such personnel as may be necessary.

10.4 The Provincial Hospital, or designated Provincial Hospital, shall serve as the site of the Integrated Provincial Health Office.

Section XI. Functions of the Integrated District Hospital

11.1 The district hospital shall be the implementing unit for the integration of health and medical services in its area. It shall exercise supervision and control over health and medical services provided by the national government within its area including municipal hospitals.

11.2. The rural health units and specialized field units in addition to their present functions shall serve as outpatient service units of the district hospitals.

11.3. The barangay health stations shall constitute extensions of the rural health units.

Section XII. Personnel Policies

l2.1 Appointments to positions in the new staffing patterns shall, in general, be in accordance with the merit requirements of the Civil Service Law and rules and duly approved qualification standards for such positions; provided, that in case of new position titles, qualification standards shall be developed by the Ministry, subject to the approval of the Civil Service Commission; provided further, that employment of persons other than those of the agencies and offices abolished or reorganized shall also be considered; provided finally, that personnel actions which need to be taken shall be in accordance with applicable Civil Service Law and rules.

12.2. Appointment to positions of Chiefs of the Medical Centers and Special Hospitals under the Office of the Minister shall be at large. Assignment to any of the medical centers or special hospitals in the Office of the Minister shall be carried out through the issuance of Ministry orders be at large. Assignment to any of the provinces or cities within the region shall be carried out through the issuance of ministry orders upon the recommendation of the Regional Health Director concerned.

12.4. Appointment to positions of Chiefs of District
Hospitals under the Office of the Provincial Health Officer shall be at large. Assignment to any of the district hospitals in the particular province shall be carried out through the issuance of Ministry orders upon the recommendation of the Provincial Health Officer and Regional Health Director concerned.

12.5. A system of rotation shall be undertaken periodically and whenever the interest of the service so requires

12.6. Reorganization Placement Committees, both at the Central Office and Regional Office levels, shall be organized to take charge not only of the placement of those to e re-appointed but also those to be laid off in accordance with the provisions of CSC Memorandum Circular No. 13 s. 197 of the Civil Service Commission an Memorandum Circular No. 650 of the Office of the President At the Ministry level, it shall be headed by a Deputy  Minister of Health and at the Regional Health Office level, by the Assistant Regional Health-Director, with as many heads of offices as may be necessary. It shall act in an advisory capacity to the Minister of Health or the Regional Health Director as the case maybe.

12.7. New appointments shall be issued to employees whose positions have been upgraded, reclassified, absorbed by the regional health office from any of the vertical programs, medical centers, regional hospitals, provincial health offices or district hospitals, subject to Ministry regulations and Civil Service Law and rules on the matter.

12.8. Plantilla appointments shall be issued to personnel in bureaus, offices and hospitals whose basic functions have not been changed by the reorganization. Newly recruited personnel shall continue to be issued individual appointments.

Section XIII. Other Implementing.Ru1es

13.1. Appointment of personnel to the new staffing patterns shall be at the hiring rate of the class to which the position is allocated, as provided in N00 27 as amended, provided that when an employee is re-appointed to the same or similar position equal or higher in salary range, and is already enjoying a salary rate higher than the hiring rate of the position to which he is being appointed, he shall not suffer a reduction in salary but shall be allowed to receive his actual salary in the old staffing pattern. The amount representing the difference between the actual salary and the rate authorized in the new staffing pattern shall be charged to salary savings of the Ministry of Health.

13.2. When an employee is reappointed to a position in the new staffing pattern which is lower in salary range than the one he occupied in the old setup, he shall be paid the hiring rate of the class to which the position has been allocated under NCC No. 27 as amended, or the maximum or the salary range, whichever is higher.

13.3 The allowable salary rates provided in Section l and Section 2 herein shall be subject to adjustments in accordance with Executive Order No. 1000 as implemented by NCC No. 35.

13.4. All heads of bureaus, offices, projects, services, medical centers, special hospitals, research institute, regional and provincial health offices shall be notified in writing of the approved staffing patterns immediately upon receipt thereof in the Ministry of Health.

13.5. All heads of bureaus, offices, projects, services, medical centers, special hospitals, research institute and regional health offices shall submit to the Office of the Minister of Health a list of officials and employees who may be laid off due to the reorganization. The list shall include their creditable service and a tentative computation of the amount necessary for purposes of payment of their retirement gratuity benefits under any retirement law which the persons concerned have chosen.
	13.6 Employees who have not been reappointed within three months from the time the Ministry of Health has received the approved staffing patterns shall no longer be paid their salaries or allowances, provided, however, that this is without prejudice to their right to apply for retirement benefits and gratuities under existing laws and, provided further, that this deadline shall not apply to positions of officials and employees whose appointments in the new staffing patterns shall be submitted for Presidential action or clearance.

13.7 All employees whose positions were abolished in the new staffing patterns or who are laid off by virtue of this reorganization under Executive Order No. 851 shall be entitled to all benefits and gratuities under existing laws.
	13.8 Within three months from receipt of the new staffing patters, the heads of bureaus, offices, services, medical centers, special hospitals, regional and provincial health offices and regional hospitals shall prepare a plantilla of personnel for their respective offices based on the approved staffing patterns. This shall serve as the basis for the issuance or appointments to personnel in their new positions. They shall submit through the Office of the Minister of Health, five copies of the said plantilla of personnel, including five copies signed by the head of office concerned, to the Office of Budget and Management (Attn: OCPC).
	13.9 The existing law and rule on representation and transportation allowances as provided under the General Provisions of the General Appropriations Act for CY 1984, subsistence, quarters and laundry allowances of health and hospital personnel as provided under relevant Compensation Policy guidelines of the Office of Budget and Management will continue to be applied under the new staffing patterns of the Ministry of Health.

13.10. Any case or caes which may arise in the implementation of the new staffing patterns that are not covered clearly by these provisions shall be referred by the offices concerned through the Office of the Minister of Health to the Office of Budget and Management for clarification or decision.
 

Section XIV. Appropriations for the New Staffing Patterns

14.1. The new staffing patterns under Executive Order No. 851 shall be implemented by this Office within the programmed appropriations for current operating expenditures of the Ministry of Health; provided that, it may avail of Paragraph 6 of the Special Provisions of the Ministry of Health in the General Appropriations Act or the realignment and reprogramming of appropriations in implementing Executive Order No. 851.

Section XV. Effectivity

This Order supersedes MO Administrative Order No. 65 dated July 11, 1983 and takes effect immediately.

   

 

</body>  

<sign>MANUEL S. ALBA</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Budget</signtitle>
 
<sign>J.C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health </signtitle>
