   
Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>25/1/1985</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 106-A,s. 1985</docnum>


<subject> Subject: Amendments to Administrative Order No. 60 s. 1968, on Regulations Governing the Operation of Drug Establishments.</subject>

<body>
Chapter II of Republic Act No 3720 otherwise known as the "Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act" contains the following Declaration of Policy

"SEC 2. It is hereby declared the policy of the State to insure safe and good quality supply of food, drug and cosmetic and to regulate the production, sale, and traffic of the same to protect the health of the people.”

“SEC 3. In the implementation of the foregoing policy, the Government shall in accordance with the provisions of this Act:

a) Establish standards and quality measures for food, drug and cosmetic.
b) Adopt measures to insure pure and safe supply of food, drug and cosmetic in the country.”


To ensure compliance With established standards, it has become imperative to look closely into operations of "Drug Departments". A review of the records indicates that a considerable number of these entities have been organized with inadequate capitalization and equipment to ensure adequate protection to the public, minimum capital and equ1pment requirements need. to be established. 

The term "Drug Department" also needs clarification. As presently defined, it would seem to apply only to importers of drugs. However, there are activities involving drugs other than manufacturing and retailing at the drugstore level that may be legitimately engaged in but would need regulation by that Bureau of Food and Drugs to ensure that public interest is adequately protected.
1. Sec. 2.8 of Administrative Order No. 60, s. 1968 is hereby amended to read as follows:
“2.8. The term “Drug Department” means an establishment or a part of an establishment engaged in the exportation, importation, distribution, promotion or wholesale of drugs, medicines, devices and pharmaceutical specialties.”

2. Sec. 5.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
“5.4. Requirements of a Drug Department:
	A. Juridical Personality and Capitalization. 
	An applicant for registration as a drug department, which may be an individual, partnership, or corporation, must be registered with the Bureau of Domestic Trade and must have a minimum paid-up capital of P50,000.00
B. Physical Facilities
	A drug department must possess the following:
	1. An adequate well-ventilated office or room for the public, with concrete, tile or wooden flooring.
	2. A place suitable for the storage of drugs, chemicals, biologic products and pharmaceutical specialties separate from general merchandise
	3. Suitable cabinets for keeping poisons and dangerous drugs (prohibited and regulated)
The application for registration as Drug Department shall be accompanied by a contract appointing the applicant as the exporter, importer, distributor, promoter or wholesaler of drugs, medicines and pharmaceutical specialties -Of the manufacturer
	4. Sanitary facilities

C. Reference Books
	1. pharmacopeia – latest edition
	2. Merck index
	3. Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (R.A. 3720 and regulations)
	4. Pharmacy Law, rules and regulations
D. Contract with Manufacturer
	1. The application for registration as Drug Department shall be accompanied by a contract appointing the applicant as the exporter, importer, distributor, promoter or wholesaler of drugs, medicines and pharmaceutical specialties of the manufacturer. A Drug Department desiring to distribute its own branded product shall submit an agreement with the contract manufacturer. A contract shall not be required of a Drug Department that is a subsidiary or forms part of a Pharmaceutical, Drug Manufacturing or Processing Laboratory.
	2. The contract must stipulate the following:
	a. Period of validity and renewal of contract
	b. Terms of cancellation or revocation. (Should this sub-section be not included in the terms, it shall be understood to mean that either of the parties can cancel or revoke the contract at will).
	3. The party or parties who shall initiate the cancellation or revocation of the contract shall cause to be submitted to the BFAD, within three (3) days of the cancellation, the full information and/ or documentation of such act which includes, among others, the following:
	a. Copy of the revocation of the contract.
	b. Inventory report of the stocks, labels and other packaging materials on hand including those in the laboratory’s premises.
	E. Licensing Requirements
	No Drug Department shall operate without having first secured a Certificate of Compliance with Technical Requirements (CTR) and License to operate (LTR) from the Bureau of Food and Drugs.

3. Effectivity This regulation shall' take effect immediately upon approval.

</body>  
<sign>RECOMMENDED BY: CATALINA C. SANCHEZ</sign>
<signtitle>DIRECTOR</signtitle>
<sign>APPROVED BY: J.C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health</signtitle>