Republic of the Philippines
Ministry of Health
OFFICE OF THE MINISTER
Manila

 

<date>24/10/1985</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 135-A,s. 1985</docnum>


<subject>Subject: Guidelines and operating procedures in the utilization of funds for Capital Outlays.</subject>


 <body>
	In order to ensure efficiency and effectiveness in the utilization of funds appropriated for capital outlay for the construction of hospitals, sanitaria, health centers, clinics, herbal processing plants, warehouses and health stations provided by the special provisions in Batas Pambansa Bilang 866, all concerned are hereby directed to observe the following guidelines:
	1.0 General Guidelines
		1.1 Releases of allotments for capital outlay shall be taken up in the books of the Accounting Division of the Ministry upon receipt of advice from the Office of Budget and Management.
	1.2 Authorized official of the agency/operating unit shall make representation with regional or local office of the Ministry of Public Works and Highways for the construction of the project in coordination with the Project Management Service of the Ministry of Health.
	1.3 Final site, costing, design and timetable for the construction of the project shall be prepared by the Ministry of Public Works and Highways to be reviewed and approved by the Minister of Health; however, in case of new construction where the preparations of architectural plan is necessary and provided for in the budget for capital outlay, the architectural service shall be hired and paid by the Ministry of Health at the rate prescribed by the United Architect of the Philippines.
	1.4 Upon receipt of the recommendation by the Project Management Service, Ministry of Health, the Request for Obligation of Allotment (ROA) for the 100% shall be prepared by the Budget Division, Financial and Management Service.

1.5 Certification naps to the availability of funds for the project shall be made by the Financial and Management Service, particularly the Accounting Division, with the approval of the Minister.
1.6 The minister of Health shall be furnished a copy of contract entered into by the ministry of Public Works and Highways
1.7 Funding for the project shall be in the form of cash advance issued to Regional Director or District Engineer of the local office of the Ministry of Public Works and Highways who shall furnish the Minister of Health a copy of the bond.
1.8 Initial cash advance (8-70-600) shall be determined by the Project Management Service of the Ministry of Health, but shall not exceed 50% of the total contract price of the project. Disbursement Voucher shall be prepared by the Budget Division, Financial and Management Service.

2.0 for utilization of funds for the project
	2.1 Report of disbursements for the initial cash advance prepared by the Ministry of Public Works and Highways shall be submitted to the Office of the Minister.
	2.2 Additional funding shall be made depending upon the progress of the project as certified by the Ministry of Public Works and Highways and concurred in by an authorized official of the Ministry of Health, verified/inspected by their auditor and upon submission of the report of disbursements of the initial cash advance given to Regional Director or District Engineer of the local office of the Ministry of Public Works and Highways
	2.3 Contractor of the project shall be paid out of the cash advance issued to the Ministry of Public Works and Highways. Within ten days after the payment of the contractor, report of disbursements for the liquidation of cash advance for the final payment of the project shall be submitted to the Office of the Minister, supported with all the documents proving the 100% accomplishment of the contract.
	2.4 The appropriate capital account shall be transferred to the books of the agency/operating unit concerned from the books of the Office of the Minister upon completion of the project and submission of all reports.
	2.5 A retention fee of equivalent to 10% shall be retained by the Ministry of Health to be paid directly to the contractor only upon receipt of the report of disbursement liquidating in full the Cash Advance in the possession of the Regional Director or District Engineer of the Ministry of Public Works and Highways including the acceptance and turnover documents of completed project by Minister of Health officials concerned.
	This Order shall take effect immediately. Strict compliance with the above guidelines is enjoined to all.
 </body>  

<sign>J.C. AZURIN</sign>
<signtitle>Minister of Health </signtitle>
