Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>30/7/1987</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 24 s. 1987</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Measures to improve administrative supervision over procurement as a means of reducing substantially the cost of government operations.</subject>
<body>
I. PURPOSE
This Order is issued to prescribe guidelines and related procedures aimed at improving the efficiency and effectivity of administrative supervision over procurement transactions. Such an improvement is necessary to reduce substantially the cost of government operations and allow the Department to increase public service benefits out of its limited budget.

II. Coverage
Procurement referred to in the Order includes all procurement for supplies and materials, drug and medicines, medical supplies and equipment.
III. Policies
In addition to general policies provided for in other pertinent issuances and regulations, the following policies shall be implemented at various levels of the Department.

1. The Department I moving towards a decentralized budget providing for releases directly to the agency for which such budgets were appropriated. It is, however, a policy to encourage pooling of resources for procurement of needs common to various agencies with decentralized budgets. This means that the Department will encourage portions of provincial budgets to be pooled at the regional level r even at the national level for the purpose of funding procurement requirements common to the agencies concerned.
2. The Department recognizes that there will always be some need for an agency to procure some of its requirements directly y itself and upon the authority of the head of agency. Even when opportunities for pooling of resource are maximized, it is expected that there will always be valid reasons for the agency to exercise procurement decisions directly. It is a policy of the department to simplify and reduce the requirements for exercising this procurement decision.
This means that under existing delegations, head of agencies are authorized to decide on the procurement of items required by the agencies.

3. The Department encourages agencies to decide on the pooling of budgets for procurement for purposes of economy or the direct and independent procurement by an individual agency for purposes of responsiveness. In any case, monitoring of how procurement was undertaken (what, how much, from whom, and when) shall be required at every level. This means that provinces shall monitor provincial procurement and the central office shall monitor all procurement.
The guidelines and procedures that follow shall seek to implement the above policies.

4. Guidelines and Procurement
4..1 All procurement shall comply with COA Circular No. 78-84.
4.1.2 in particular, all procurement should be duly documented. Such documentation shall include , aside from other requirement, a purchase order or a letter order.
4.1.3 all purchase orders or letter orders shall contain at least the following information:
	4.1.3.1 Purchase/letter order number (designed to be numerically consecutive and utilizing only one numerical series for that agency);
	4.1.3.2 Agency to which the account shall be charged and the requisition number;
	4.1.3.3 Name and address of the contractor/supplier;
	4.1.3.4 Complete description and specifications of the items purchased plus all other information needed to enable the supplier, agency officials, COA representative and all others concerned to determine the nature and quality of items purchased.;
	4.1.3.5 Quantity, unit price and total price;
	4.1.3.6 Period of Delivrey;
	4.1.3.7 Shipping terms and directions and other conditions of delivery;
	4.1.3.8 Provision for penalty for late delivery, no delivery and substitution.
	4.1.3.9 Conditions regarding importation, if any;
	4.1.3.10 Date of effectivity and termination of contract
	4.1.3.11 Notation as to compliance with having a certificate of the Chief accountant as to availability of funds;
	4.1.3.12 Approval by duly authorized agency representative;
	4.1.3.13 Signature of supplier indicating receipt of the Purchase/letter order and contract and the date it was received.

4.1.4 All purchase/letter orders shall be prepared with enough copies to include a clear copy for submission to the supervising agency i.e. to PHO for districts, to RHO for PHOs and Regional hospitals/medical centers/sanitaria
4.1.5 All agencies shall maintain a file of all purchase/letter orders issued in numerical sequence and always available for inspection.
4.2 Monitoring of Procurement
	4.2.1 All purchase/letter order issued by an agency during a month shall be submitted to the supervising agency within 15 days after the end of that month. The purchase/letter orders shall be arranged consecutively by number and all missing numbers shall be duly accounted for.

4.2.2 Provincial Health Offices shall review purchases of districts and municipal hospitals. Regional Health Offices shall review purchases of provinces and regional hospital/medical centers/sanitaria.

4.2.3 The review shall consider the following:
	4.2.3.1 Pries in comparison with local marker prices
	4.2.3.2 Frequency of purchases
	4.2.3.3 Volume of purchases
	4.2.3.4 Mode of Purchases
	4.2.3.5 Funding
	4.2.3.6 Identity of Supplier

4.2.4 Upon reviewing the purchases, the monitoring agency (PHO for districts and municipal hospitals; RHO for PHO’s and regional hospitals/medical centers) shall do the following:
	4.2.4.1 Require explanations for noted deficiencies 
	4.2.4.2 Prepare plans/proposals for pooling requirements common to agencies under supervision
	4.2.4.3 Report to Office of Chief of Staff results of monitoring on a quarterly basis.
4.3 Identification of all suppliers
	4.3.1 Within a period of six months after the issuance of this Order, all PHO’s shall identify all suppliers dealing with the districts, municipal hospitals and the PHO. A supplier identification sheet is attached as Annex A.
This identification sheet shall be filled up by all suppliers except those that are already accredited at the region or at the central office.
	4.3.2 Whenever  month’s submission of purchase/letter orders contain one with a supplier that has not previously filled up a supplier identification sheet, that submission should be accompanied by a duly filled up supplier identification sheet.
4.4 Monitoring policies
	4.4.1 As previously mentioned, the districts and municipal hospitals shall be monitored by PHO’s and the PHO’s, regional hospitals and regional medical centers and sanitaria shall be monitored by the RHO’s.
	4.4.2 Special hospitals and specialty hospitals shall be monitored by hospital Operations and Management Service (HOMS)
	4.4.3 Monitoring reports (PHO’s, RHO’s, HOMS) shall be submitted to the Office of Chief of Staff, Attention: Assistant Secretary for Financial Operations and Front Line Services Audit.
4.5 Consequent Actions Arising out of monitoring.
	4.5.1 All agencies are informed that reporting requirements under this Order are mandatory. Non-reporting shall be treated as an administrative offense for investigation and subsequent action.
	4.5.2 Notifications to explain noted deficiencies as well as replies shall be treated as evidence in whatever future legal action may be taken. Hence, monitoring agencies shall keep copies safely on file.
	4.5.3 Monitoring agencies are encouraged to undertake remedial actions for whatever deficiencies are noted in monitoring. If measures can be taken within the agencies authority that can reduce cost or improve responsiveness, then such actions should be taken.
4.6 Effectivity
	4.6.1 This Order shall take effect immediately to cover the procurement to be undertaken for the month of Augsut, 1987

4.2 Monitoring of Procurement
	4.2.1 All purchase/letter orders issued by an agency during a month shall be submitted to the supervising agency within 15 days later the end of that month. The purchase/letter orders shall be arranged consecutively by number and all missing numbers shall be duly accounted for.
	4.2.2 Provincial Health Offices shall review purchases of districts and municipal hospitals. Regional Health Offices shall review our purchases of provinces and regional hospital/medical centers/sanitaria.
	4.2.3 The review shall consider the following:
	4.2.3.1 Prices in comparison with local market prices.
	4.2.3.2 Frequency of purchases
	4.2.3.3 Volume of purchases
	4.2.3.4 Mode of purchases
	4.2.3.5 Funding 
	4.2.3.6 Identity of supplier
4.2.4 Upon reviewing the purchases, the monitoring agency (PHO for districts and municipal hospitals; RHO for PHO’s and regional hospitals/medical centers) shall do the following:
	4.2.4.1 Require explanations for noted deficiencies
	4.2.4.2 Prepare plans/proposals for pooling requirements common to agencies under supervision
	4.2.4.3 Report to the Office of Chief of Staff results of monitoring on a quarterly basis.
4.3 Identification of all suppliers
	4.3.1 Within a period of six months after the issuance of this Order, all PHO’s shall identify all suppliers dealing with the districts, municipal hospitals and the PHO. A supplier identification sheet is attached as Annex A.
	This identification sheet shall be filled up by all suppliers except those that are already accredited at the region or at the central office.
	4.3.2 Whenever a month’s submission of purchase/letter orders contain one with a supplier that has not previously filled up a supplier identification sheet, that submission should be accompanied by a duly filled up supplier identification sheet.

4.4 Monitoring agencies
	4.4.1 As previously mentioned, the districts and municipal hospitals shall be monitored by PHO’s and the PHO’s regional hospitals and regional medical centers and sanitaria shall be monitored by the RHO’s
	4.4.2 Special hospitals and specialty hospitals shall be monitored by Hospital Operations and Management Service (HOMS)
	4.4.2 Monitoring reports (PHO’s, RHO’s HOMS) shall be submitted to the Office of Chief of Staff, Attention: Assistant Secretary for Financial Operations and Front Line Services Audit.

4.5 Consequent Actions Arising Out of Monitoring
	4.5.1 All agencies are informed that reporting requirements under this Order are mandatory. Non-reporting shall be treated as an administrative offense for investigation and subsequent action.
	4.5.2 Notifications to explain noted deficiencies as well as replies shall be treated as evidence in whatever future legal action may be taken. Hence, monitoring agencies shall keep copies safely on file.
	4.5.1 Monitoring agencies are encouraged to undertake remedial actions for whatever deficiencies are noted in monitoring. If measures can be taken within the agencies authority that can reduce cost or improve responsiveness, then such actions should be taken.
4.6 Effectivity
	4.6.1 This order shall take effect immediately to cover the procurement to be undertaken for the month of August, 1987.
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
