Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>15/3/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 66 s. 1989</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Rules and Regulations on the Process of Review and Evaluation of Questioned Drugs of Drug Combinations</subject>

<body>
	Pursuant to Section 3 (c) and 26 (a) of Republic Act No. 3720, as amended, the following rules and regulations are hereby promulgated to govern the banning from the market of drugs or drug combinations which have been banned from the market of drugs or drug combinations which have been found unsafe, inefficacious or of doubtful therapeutic value.

SECTION 1 DEFINITION OF TERMS

1.1 "Banning" is an act to prohibit the importation, manufacture distribution and sale of a drug determined to be unsafe, inefficacious or of doubtful therapeutic value as a consequence of which products containing such drug or drug combination shall not be registered, or if already registered, they shall be removed from the registry.

1.2 "Drug" means the active ingredient responsible for the pharmacologic or therapeutic effect of the product.

1.3 "Pharmaceutical" or Drug product" is the finished dosage_
form that contains the active ingredients), generally but
not necessarily in association with inactive ingredients.

SECTION 2 PRUCEDURE FOR REVIEW QND EVQLUQTIUN

2.1 The process of review and evaluation is initiated when
reliable scientific information indicated that a drug or
combinationsù of drugs is unsafe or inefficacious or of doubtful therapeutic value; or when there is a complaint by any party with substantial interest. The complaint should be properly documented and should include the following information:

2.1.1 proper identification of the drug or combination of drugs

2.1.2 description of reason to doubt its efficacy or therapeutic value
or therapeutic value
 
2.2 The BFAD review process will involve the following steps:
	2.2.1 Notification of affected drug establishment(s) under whose name the drug product(s) containing the questioned drug or combination of drugs was registered. the notification shall also include information on the process to be followed in reviewing and evaluating the drug(s) in question.
	2.2.2 Notification of other interested parties, if any, that BFAD is reviewing the status of the drug.
	2.2.3 Submission by all interested parties of materials for or against the subject drug.
	2.2.3.1 Position papers shall be submitted, in 5 copies, within 30 days after receipt of notice from BFAD.

2.2.3.2 Automatic extension shall not be granted unless partial submission has been made. These extension shall be granted only when such extension is expected to yield new material information and only when public safety will not be compromised.

2.2.4. All interested parties shall be furnished copies of
the materials submitted to BFAD in evidence and shall have fifteen (15} calendar days after their receipt to examine and comment on these materials.

2.2.5 BFAD reviews all submissions and determines whether a prima facie case exists against the drug or combination of drugs.

2.2.5.1 If the case is obviously not meritorious, BFAD recommends dismissal of the case to the Secretary of Health. Should the Secretary of Health believe that there is reasonable ground to reverse the BFAD recommendation, he shall order a public hearing.
2.2.5.2 If the evidence is enough to support a finding that the drug is unsafe, inefficacious or of doubtful therapeutic value, BFAD makes the necessary recommendation to the Secretary of Health within 30 days from end of submissions.

2.2.5.3 If the evidence seems meritorious but does not support a finding, BFAD undertakes a hearing.
2.2.6 Process of Hearing
	2.2.6.1 BFAD will publish the order and date of public hearing, which shall not be later than fifteen calendar days from the date of the publication of such order.

2.2.6.2 The affected drug establishment must justify continued BFAD registration of the product on the basis of safety, efficacy, and therapeutic value of active ingredients
it contains. All interested parties may present additional documentary evidence to clarify and supplement their position papers within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of initial hearing. The verified and authentic evidence and the position papers shall constitute the direct evidence on the questioned drug.

2.2.6.3 All parties are entitled to cross-examine the witnesses that may be presented by the interested parties 'and affected drug establishments or witnesses who may be
called by BFAD to establish the authenticity, degree of accuracy and/or propriety of the reports or documents submitted in evidence or to testify to any material fact. For this purpose, BFAD shall require all parties concerned to submit a list of these witnesses and the time frame within which they will testify. This list and the time frame shall be strictly followed. Any witness not in the list shall not be allowed to testify.
Failure to testify within the approved time frame shall be deemed a waiver on the part of the interested party.

2.2.7 The BFAD may call upon a panel of experts, if necessary, to provide additional information and to evaluate submissions and evidence. These experts shall advise BFAD on the matter.

2.2.8 The submissions and the evidence presented in the public hearing shall be evaluated by BFAD on the basis of current standards for safety, efficacy and therapeutic value as defined in A.O. ___ (Drug Product Registration). 

2.2.9 The BFAD shall make a recommendation to the Secretary of Health within thirty (30) days from termination of hearing.
2.2.10 The Secretary of Health shall decide the final action to be taken and shall duly inform the parties concerned of the decision taken.


2.3. This procedure of review and evaluation does not preclude however the BFQD from submitting a recommendation to immediately ban a drug and all products containing it in cases where there is a clear finding of serious or lethal toxicity constituting undue risk to public safety. In which cases, the BFAD shall submit its finding and recommendation, together with records of substantial evidence to the Secretary of Health for immediate action.

SECTION 3 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
	In case any provision of these rules and regulations is declared contrary to law or unconstitutional, other provisions which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in force and in effect.

SECTION 4. REPEALING CLAUSE
	All other administrative orders, rules, regulations and other administrative issuances or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

In case any provision of these rules and regulations is declared
contrary to law or unconstitutional, other provisions which are not
affected thereby shall continue to be in force and in effect.

SECTION 5 EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 

  
   

</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health </signtitle>