Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE 

<date>9/3/1989</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 63 s. 1989</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Rules and Regulations to Implement Dispensing Requirements under the Generics Act of 1988 (R.A. No. 6675)</subject>

<body>
Pursuant to Section 9 in relation to Section 6 (a) and 6 (d) of RA 6675 known as the Generics Act of 1988, and the pertinent provisions of R.A. No. 3720 known as the Foods, Drugs and Devices and Cosmetics Act as amended by Executive Order No. 175 s. 1987, RA 5921 known as the Pharmacy Act, R.A. 6425 known as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972, as amended, the following rules and regulations are hereby promulgated.
Section 1 DEFINITION OF TERMS:
1.1 Dispensing is the act by a validly-registered pharmacist of filling a prescription or doctor’s order on the patient’s charts.
1.2 Generic Dispensing means dispensing the patient’s/ buyer’s choice from among generic equivalents, i.e., finishing pharmaceutical products having the same active ingredient(s), same dosage form and same strength as the prescribed drug.
1.3 Partial filling of prescription means dispensing less than the total number of units prescribed.
1.4 Drug Outlet means drugstore, pharmacy and other business establishment which sells drugs or medicines.
Section 2 GUIDELINES ON DISPENSING BASED ON PRIOR LAWS
	Prior to the Generics Act of 1988, the following general guidelines on dispensing have been operative. In order to have an integrated implementation of all relevant guidelines on dispensing, these guidelines based on prior lawn are restated hereunder:
2.1 Prescription or Ethical Drugs
These drugs can only be dispensed upon a written order of a validly-registered physician, dentist or veterinarian.
2.2 Non—Prescription or Over-the-Counter (OTC) Drugs
These drugs may be dispensed even without a written order of a validly—registered physician, dentist or veterinarian in duly licensed drug outlets. When dispensing OTC drugs without a doctor’s prescription, the pharmacist shall give the necessary information and direction for use of the drug.
2.3 All prescriptions dispensed in the drugstore, botica or hospital pharmacy shall be kept in file for two years and recorded in a prescription book duly-registered by BFAD which shall be open for inspection to Food and Drug Inspectors at any time during business hours of the outlet. The prescription book shall be kept for two years after the last entry.
Section 3 ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES ON DISPENSING TO IMPLEMENT THE GENERICS ACT OF 1988
In addition to the guidelines contained in Section 2, the following shall specifically guide dispensing under the Generics Act of 1988”
3.1 All drug outlets are registered to practice generic dispensing as defined in Section 1.2 of these Rules and Regulations, with some exceptions, modifications or qualifications in certain cases or circumstances, as described in Section 3.2 and 3.4.
	3.1.1 Drug Stores, Boticas, and Other Drug Outlets
	In order to ensure the informed choice and use of drugs by the patient/buyer, the drug outlet is required to:
		3.1.1.1 Inform the patient/ buyer of all available drug products 


generically equivalent to the one prescribed with their corresponding prices. In so doing, the drug outlet shall not favor or suggest any particular product so that the patient/ buyer may fully and adequately exercise his option to choose.
		3.1.1.2 For this purpose, all drug outlets shall post in a conspicuous place in their establishment a list of drug products using generic names with their brand names, if any, and their corresponding current prices. A hand-book or directory containing the above required information, readily accessible to the patient/ buyer shall be considered substantial compliance.
       3.1.2 Hospital Pharmacies
       Recognizing the special needs and circumstances of hospitals, the following modified rules and regulations shall govern generic dispensing in hospital pharmacies, in the case of in-patients only:
       	3.1.2.1 Upon admission, the patient or his/her responsible relative shall indicate in writing whether he/she shall submit to hospital drug policies or reserve the options to buy drugs and medicines outside of the hospital pharmacy.
       	3.1.2.2 Hospital pharmacies operating on an acceptable formulary system and pricing policy as determined by the Department of Health (DOH), and using generic terminology in procurement, prescribing, dispensing, and recording of drugs, shall be exempted from the following:


       		3.1.2.2.1 Recording of prescriptions filled in the prescription book, provided such prescriptions shall be kept in file for two years.
       		3.1.2.2.2 Individually informing the in-patient/buyer on available generic equivalents and their corresponding prices. However, a handbook or directory containing the required drug information must be made available in the words for patients, responsible relatives of patients, and professional staff.
3.2 In dispensing to the buyer, drug products in unit dose or products which are not in their original containers but transferred to small bottles, tin cans, boxes, plastic and/or paper envelopes and the like, the pharmacist shall place legibly on the required drug outlet’s label the following information:
	1. Name of the patient;
	2. Generic name of the drug;
	3. Brand name, if any;
	4. Manufacturer;
	5. Dosage strength;
	6. Expiry date;
	7. Directions for use; and
	8. Name of pharmacist
3.3 In partial filling of the prescription, the following shall be written on the face of the prescription:
	1. the date of partial filling
	2. the quantity served and balance of the prescription unserved; and
	3. name and address of the drugstores


The partially-filled prescription shall be returned to the buyer after recording the partial filling in the prescription shall keep the prescription in file.
3.4 Dispensing Drugs in List A and List B
In dispensing drugs included in List A (Prohibited and Regulated Drugs) and List B (Drugs Requiring Strict Precautions in their Use), attached as Annex A and B respectively, the following shall be observed:
	3.4.1 Dispensing must be done by the pharmacist who shall affix his/her signature on the prescription filled.
	3.4.2 The order and instructions of the doctor as written on the prescription, must be precisely followed.
	3.4.3 Partial filling of prescription for drugs belonging to List A shall not be allowed.
Section 4 GUIDELINES ON WHAT TO DO WITH VIOALTIVE, ERRONEOUS, AND IMPOSSIBLE PRESCRIPTIONS
4.1 Violative and impossible prescriptions as defined in A.O __ (Generic Prescribing) shall not be filled. The pharmacist shall advise the prescriber of the problem and/or instruct the customer to get the proper prescription. These violative and wrong prescriptions shall be kept and reported by the pharmacist or other interested party to the nearest DOH office for appropriate action.
4.2 Erroneous prescriptions shall be filled, but they shall also be kept and reported to the nearest DOH office for appropriate action.
Section 5 VIOLATION ON THE PART OF DISPENSERS AND OUTLETS
The following acts or omissions are considered violations of these rules and regulations:
5.1 Imposing a particular brand or product on the buyer.


5.2 Inaccurate dispensing i.e. dispensing a drug product which does not meet the prescription as to any or all of the following: active ingredient, dosage form and strength.
5.3 Failure to post or make accessible the required up-to-date information on drug products.
5.4 Failure to adequately inform the buyer on available products that meet the prescription.
5.5 Failure to indicate the generic name/official name designated by BFAD and other required information on the drug outlet’s label of the dispensed drug.
5.6 Failure to record and keep prescriptions filled.
5.7 Failure to report to the nearest DOH offices cases of violative, erroneous, and/or wrong prescriptions within three months after receipt of such prescriptions.
Section 6 REPORTING AND MONITORING OF NON-COMPLIANCE
Any interested party may report any verifiable violation of these Rules and Regulations to the nearest DOH office. The local DOH office is responsible for giving notice to erring pharmacists/outlets and for transmitting the report on violations to the Secretary of Health or the fiscal’s office for appropriate action.
Section 7 ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS
For violation of these Rules and Regulations, the following sanctions, after due notice and summary hearing, may be imposed:
7.1 Suspension, or revocation of the license to operate the drug outlet by the Secretary of Health
7.2 Professionals directly involved in the violations shall be recommended by the Secretary of Health for appropriate administrative sanctions by the PRC.


Section 8 CRIMINAL LIABILITY
The imposition of the above sanctions does not preclude the institution of appropriate criminal proceedings pursuant to Section 12 of RA 6675 known as the Generics Act 1988, RA 3720 known as “Foods, Drugs and Devices and Cosmetics Act” as amended and R.A. 5921 known as “Pharmacy Law” as amended, R.A. 6425 known as the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972 as amended and other relevant laws, by the regional health office concerned, upon receipt of complaints or reports of violations.
Section 9 TIMETABLE OF IMPLEMENTATION
In order to give all affected parties adequate time for learning and adjustment, the implementation of these Rules and Regulations shall be in three phases, as follows:
Phase 1 Education Drive and Information Dissemination
This phase shall be from the date of the effectivity of these Rules and Regulations to May 31, 1989. During this period, the DOH, in cooperation with the Department of Education, Culture and Sports, the Department of Local Government, and the Philippines Information Agency, shall undertake an education drive and information dissemination concerning the provisions of these Rules and Regulations as well as the Generics Act of 1988.
Phase 2 Monitoring of Compliance Without Sanctions or Penalties
From June 1, 1989 to August 31, 1989, the DOH shall monitor voluntary compliance with the provisions of the Rules and Regulations on Prescribing and Dispensing. During this period, the associations of affected professionals are enjoined to promote compliance in order to achieve a smooth transition to the next phase of full implementation.


Phase 3 Full Implementation
Beginning September 1, 1989, the DOH and the other relevant agencies of government shall monitor compliance with these Rules and Regulations and all violations shall be subject to the appropriate sanctions and penalties provided for under these Rules and Regulations and the Generics Act of 1988.
Section 8 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
In case any provision of this Administrative Order is declared contrary to law or unconstitutional, other provisions which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in force and in effect.
Section 9 REPEALING CLAUSE
All Administrative Orders, Rules and Regulations and other Administrative issuances or parts thereof, inconsistent with provisions of the Administrative Order are hereby repealed and modified accordingly.

Section 10 EFFECTIVITY
This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in two newspapers of general circulation.
 
</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>