Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>8/4/1991</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 104-A, s. 1991</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: THE ESSENTIAL NATIONAL HEALTH RESEARCH PROGRAM</subject>

<body>
1. BACKGROUND

The Department of Health by its very nature is mandated to seek ways of improving the health care delivery system from the point of view of equity, efficiency, effectiveness and quality. These concerns provide the underpinnings of relevant health researches which eventually proved to be the means to guide policy making and efficient implementation of health programs. Subsequently, during the Nobel Assembly in Stockholm in February, 1990, the Commission on Health Research for Development declared that every nation no matter how poor, should conduct Essential National Health Research in their country. It was in the same forum that the Department of Health of the Philippines, through the Secretary of Health made a public commitment to promote and undertake ENHR. This order provides for guidelines on the organization and management of the program on Essential National Health Research in the Philippines. 


2. POLICY

It is the policy of the DOH to plan, organize and implement an ENHR program in the Philippines as a means to improve the health status of the greater majority of the Filipinos and the equitable distribution of services in the Philippines. The ENHR unit under the Office of the Secretary of Health is the central office responsible for staff support to the ENHR program. All DOH agencies as well as cooperating institutions shall be responsible for executing program activities. 


3. THE ENHR PROGRAM

I. Premises

ENHR is a movement to promote a scientific and data-based culture within the health sector. It is a program to direct, coordinate, support and sustain health research activity among the numerous institutions and researchers in the country. The ENHR has the following premises:

	First, research is undertaken to serve the public health. 

	Second, research is a problem solving activity.

	Third, a country’s research agenda must be determined jointly by the doers and the users of the research.

	Fourth, research must not end until the results are put into effect in improved policies and programs. 

	Fifth, resources for research are limited. 

II. VISION

Health is an investment for a better world. ENHR is a global movement that harnesses the power of research to attain health and development. 

The Philippines is one with the global community in the movement towards equity in development through health research. Through a directed and organized application of the scientific process in dealing with the country’s health problems and in strengthening health action, we envision the improvement of the health status of the greater majority of the Filipinos and the equitable distribution of health services and benefits.

III. GENERAL OBJECTIVE

The programs aims to create and sustain a conducive research environment and scientific culture within the health sector which generates critical inputs for improving problem definition, policy formulation, operations efficiency and effectiveness in the health sector, given limited resources. 


IV. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES

1. To reinforce research consciousness among policy makers, health providers, and other health professionals; 

2. To define priority health issues which research can address; 

3. To establish and operate a mechanism which generates a dynamic research agenda responsive to the health needs of the Filipino people;

4. To develop technical and managerial competence for research to pursue a Philippine agenda;

5. To strengthen the capacity of local institutions to enhance and sustain productivity of researchers and research managers;

6. To generate nationally relevant research;

7. To ensure that research results lead to improved policy formulation and operations effectiveness; and 

8. To maximize the impact of research in improved health sector operations and community action.

V. GUIDING PRINCIPLES

In defining the spirit of conduct of ENHR in the Philippines, we choose to be guided by the following principles:

1. ENHR is a national effort within the global movement. International linkages are premised on primary reliance on the country’s own resources to sustain ENHR. 

2. The ENHR is an organized process that builds up, supports, coordinates and sustains health research activities towards a national agenda for health action. 


3. The ENHR program advocates decentralization, initiative and creativity within a rational framework of organization and management.

4. The Department of Health plays a lead role in the ENHR program. In the process, it will also establish, clarify and strengthen inter-agency and multisectoral linkages in order to broaden, deepen and enrich the vision of the DOH.


5. The process of research agenda formulation must be broad-based and participatory. The users of research—policy makers, managers, operations personnel and the people as beneficiaries—are an integral part of this consultative process. 

6. The research agenda should articulate the five areas of the responsibility of the DOH:

a. health sector organization;
b. disease control and public health;
c. personal health care;
d. health care financing; and
e. health product development.

In the face of limited resources, the research agenda should be guided by a consideration of potential benefits to be derived so that the best alternative course of action is chosen. Sociocultural and behavioral concerns are equally important in agenda-setting.

7. Multidisciplinary research and linkages are essential to the process of 
seeking innovative but realistic solutions to health problems. 

8. To ensure maximum utilization of research results, dialogue and consensus between doers and users of research should be a continuing activity throughout the entire research process. 

VI. STRATEGIES AND INDICATIVE ACTIVTIES 

A. Advocating ENHR

1. The DOH shall be responsible for generating public visibility and wider 
understanding of ENHR. Policy- and decision-makers will lead the task of advocacy.


2. The following points will be emphasized in promoting a research and scientific 
	culture:

a. the importance of health and health research in the national development agenda;
b. the need for setting research priorities and formulating a national research agenda;
c. the need for recognition and support of health professionals;
d. the need for sustained support of research institutions;
e. the vital importance of utilizing research in health operations.

3. The ENHR concept shall be promoted among institutions and health providers  
within the DOH, institutions and health providers within the broader health sector, the academe and government policy circles.

B. Operationalizing ENHR

1. A unit within the DOH shall be responsible for defining the defining the steps to operationalize ENHR.

2. Operationalization shall involve the following group of activities:

a. Articulate policies designed to make ENHR an inherent part of the health sector particularly of the DOH (orders, circulars, manuals, legislation);
b. Establish and organize structures for the management and organization of ENHR;
c. Prepare activities that shall be mandated within the DOH and that may be adopted by institutions/agencies collaborating with the DOH;
d. Recognize and support initiatives consistent with ENHR;
e. Consult with DOH program managers on the ENHR component of service delivery programs. 

C. Managing ENHR

1. Overall management and coordination of ENHR shall be assigned to a DOH unit.

2. Management shall begin with the preparation of a five-year directional plan and annual operational plan. 



3. These plans shall describe:

a. DOH-wide activities
b. Specific activities of DOH units/programs
c. Activities of cooperating institutions/agencies

All activities shall be supportive of ENHR objectives and developed in a particular manner at all levels. 

4. Research objectives and processes shall be explicitly incorporated in the generic planning process of DOH.

5. A database on research capabilities and activities in the DOH shall be established and maintained.


6. The following mechanism for research agenda formulation shall be adopted:

a. Form small groups to review the “state of the art” in the five areas of responsibility of the DOH;
b. Conduct workshops involving different sectors, agencies and disciplines;
c. Identify research priorities;
d. Implement projects;
e. Present preliminary results;
f. Review and reformulate research agenda.

7. An evaluation framework for measuring progress of the ENHR program against the objectives shall be developed.

8. Communications for regular exchange of information and experiences among participating units, agencies and institutions shall be established an supported.


9. An orientation package on ENHR for various target audiences shall be developed.

10. Training program of research methodology suited to the needs of different levels of the DOH shall be planned.

D. Human Resources for ENHR


1. The human resources development strategy for ENHR shall cover:

a. Institutional plans for developing a critical mass of researchers with targeted research capabilities;
b. Re-orientation and training of non-researchers to promote research-based health action and active collaboration in researches.

2. Activities to implement the HRD strategy shall include the following:

a. At the agency/institutional level: assess the existing stock of 
researchers in terms of skills, productivity, motivation; develop a plan for upgrading skills and sustaining interest among the existing research staff and recruiting new researchers to fill projected gaps;

b. At the program level: support agencies through better access to 
information and facilities, system-wide recognition, personal management policies, career paths, competitive compensation and incentives. 


E. Institutional Resources for ENHR

1. The infrastructure which will promote responsive, cost-effective and sustainable means of advancing ENHR shall be defined in terms of processes, systems, facilities and structures.

2. Key institutions shall be identified and their infrastructure upgraded to support the motivational, technical, managerial and developmental requirements of the ENHR program. Priority areas for development shall be in the following: epidemiology, biostatistics, demography, health communications, social sciences, data management capabilities and research management capabilities.


3. Strengthened institutions shall be tasked to support the development of smaller research units in other institutions.

4. Priority control programs shall likewise review and assess their infrastructures in relation to their specific research needs. 





F. Networks for ENHR

1. Health research centers and experts, both government and private shall be identifies.
2. Networks of institutions engaged in health research or health related activities shall be established at these levels:

a. National link with international networks
b. National networking within DOH, between DOH and PCHRD, and among DOH, academe and NGO’s
c. Sub-national networks
d. Networks by disciplines

3. The networks shall promote information and resource sharing, collaborative research, consensus building and research utilization.


G. Information Resources for ENHR

1. The use of information which is collected routinely or generated by past and ongoing researches shall be optimized by:

a. Encouraging dialogue between policy makers, data managers and researchers;
b. Ensuring the collection of relevant, accurate and timely date;
c. Using flexible, user-friendly formats for aggregations and summaries of data;
d. Making data management an explicit function of specific trained personnel;
e. Re-orienting and re-training medical records librarians;
f. Facilitating the release of date and reports.

2. Existing gaps in the database will be identified and systems set-up to collect this information routinely.

H. Utilizing Outputs of ENHR

1. Policy makers and users of research shall participate in the planning and implementation of relevant and high-quality research. 


2. The results of research shall be disseminated to policy makers in a format and language that is understandable (executive summaries). 

3. Research output shall be communicated and made widely available through journal publications, newsletters, seminars, training programs, sharing of data bases and other IEC activities directed to the public (commercialization and popularization of research products).

4. Research literacy and capacity to commission research shall be incorporated in the training of health service managers.


5. Health systems research and feasibility studies of DOH planned interventions shall be emphasized.

I. Funding

1. As a priority program, the DOH shall endeavor to increase the allocation of national budgetary funds for ENHR activities. Within the system and existing resources, explicit expenditures for dedicated research shall be identified.

2. The funding level for research should be appropriate to the results that are expected. 

3. New funding sources (within or outside the government) for dedicated research as well as research capability strengthening shall be actively sought. This should also include funds for research dissemination.

4. A mechanism to receive and utilize funds for research will be included in the ENHR program. 



4. ORGANIZATION OF ENHR PROGRAM

4.1	An ENHR unit shall be created under the Office of the Secretary to give advice and staff assistance to the Secretary of Health for the implementation of the ENHR Program. The ENHR unit shall be headed by a Program Manager to be designated by the Secretary of Health. 


4.2 The Program Manager shall be assisted by a Steering Committee composed of key officials of the Department of Health and Clinical Epidemiology Unit of the College of Medicine, UP- Manila.

4.3 A secretariat shall be formed to support the ENHR unit. 


4.4 Although the Department of Health shall play the lead role in the ENHR program, it shall establish interagency and multi-sectoral linkages in order to broaden and deepen the research capabilities available to the health services. 


This order shall take effect immediately.



</body>
<sign>ALFREDO R.A. BENGZON, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle> Secretary of Health</signtitle>
