Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>23/6/1992</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 125 s. 1992</docnum>

<subject>Subject: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PROJECT OFFICERS OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (USAID PROJECT NO. 492-0446)</subject>


<body>
The DOH implementing structure Of HFPD was outlined in the Department order NO. 45 s. 1992 dated February 10, 1992. Selected DOH staff were designated to be responsible for the management of the Project and its three components. This Administrative Order details the roles, respons1bilities and relationships- of the key project Officers. Defining the specific tasks of involved staff is necessary to facilitate project implementat1on.

Also included in This Order are the roles and responsibilities of the Health- Policy Development Staff (HPDS). This unit within the Management Advisory Service was created by the Department Order NO. 370—I s. 1991 dated October 1, 1992 as a foca1 point within the Department for health care financing policy.

Below are roles and responsibilities of the HFDP Project Officers and the HPDS

1. Project Coordination Team
Responsibilities 1. Facilitate overall project administration
			2. provide administrative control over all fund disbursements of HFDP
Membership: 1. Assistant Secretary and Director FACS
		2. Director MAS

Reports to: Undersecretary and Chief of Staff

In order that its respon51b111t1es can be more efficiently and expeditiously executed, the Project Coordination Team will assume the following positions in the project management structure.
 
1.1 Project Director: This position will be filled by an individual with at least an Assistant Secretary level position and will have the following responsibilities:
1) Provide overall management oversight for the HFD project.
2) Coordinate linkages between intersectoral policy level steering committees, such as the National Council for Health Policy Development, and the multi-sectoral Health Policy Forum, and the HFD project management structure.
3) Brief Secretary for Health and the Undersecretary and Chief of Staff on progress and outputs from the HFD project.
4) Conduct periodic meetings to monitor progress made by the project toward achieving anticipated outputs.
5) Approve annual project implementation plans and fund Commitment levels on behalf of the DOH and endorse these to USAID.
6) Issue directives which govern the project organizational structure and creation of structural or Ad Hoc organizational units.


1.2 Project Manager for HFD Project: This position will be filled by the Director MAS and will have the following responsibilities:

1) Provide day to day-management oversight for the HFD project

2) Review and approve annual work plans from each project component prior to, their incorporation into a Comprehensive annual project implementation plan and review and approve revisions or modifications to annual work plans.

3) Prepare comprehensive annual implementation plans for the HFD project which combine inputs from the three Project components and various funding sources in complementary fashion

4) Supervise implementation conducted via the HFD project through the Component Managers for each component of the project.

5) Monitor the progress being made toward meeting benchmarks, milestones, and outputs which have been agreed upon for the HFD project.

6) Monitor the disbursement of) funds via each project component and source of funding.

7) Prepare comprehensive quarterly and annual progress reports for submission to the Project Director and Senior DOH management.

8) Provide mechanisms for coordinating inputs and activities among project components such as through the conduct of routine meetings of project management staff (“HUB”) 

9) Provide DOH approvals as required by USAID for activity level actions within approved annual work plans based on prior review and recommendations of Component Managers as appropriate.
10) Provide DOH involvement in the administrative oversight for the UPECON Grant and the institutional Contract.
11) Coordinate other USAID funded activities determined by USAID to be related to HFDP.
12) Determine level of decision making required in the DOH for policy issues generated by the HFDP project.
 
2. Component Manager Component 1, 2, 3
Membership
1. Component Manager Component 1: Director Management Advisory Service
2. component Manager Component 2: Executive Director, PMCC
3. Component Manager Component 3: Undersecretary, Office for Hospital and Facilities Service

Report to: Project Director through the Project Manager for HFD Project. 

The Project Managers will provide technical oversight and guidance for all activities within their respective components and will have the following responsibilities:

1) Formulate comprehensive annual work plans within their respective components for all funding sources available through the HFD project.

2) Within parameters established by approved annual work plans, Component-manager Component will provide direct supervision for the UPECON Grant; Component Manager Component 2.will provide direct supervision for all health insurance; related activities, within the institutional Contract which support Component 2;
3) Recommend to Project Manager proposed revisions or modifications of approved annual work plan.
4) Provide technical - oversight and the required approvals for the implementation of all activities within the approved annual work plans for their respective components.
5) Prepare quarterly and annual reports which monitor the progress of project implementation within their respective components
6) Coordinate HFD project resources and other USAID funded resources which support achievement of outputs from their respective components in order to prevent overlap and maximize impact.
7) Establish and maintain advisory, consultative and collegial arrangements and associations as deemed necessary to execute the above responsibilities.

3. Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS)
The HPDS will have responsibilities in two areas:

3.1 Project Administration3: HPDS will serve as the staff supporting the Project Coordination Team and will have the following responsibilities:

1) Provide staff support to the Project Director and the Project Manager in all aspects of HFD project management

2) Serve as administrative liaison within DOH for USAID.

3) Function as secretariat for HUB meetings and other project management level interagency committees.

4) Serve as a focus for collecting, storing, cataloging and disseminating information and reports.


Reports to: Project Manager for HFD Project

3.2 Health Policy Process: serve as the staff to the Component Manager for component 1 and will have the following responsibilities:
1) Provide staff support to the Component Manager for Component I in the management, supervision, and monitoring of the UPECON Grant '

2) Facilitate establishment of policy research agenda

3) Monitor status of policy research and demonstrations supported by D0H

4) Disseminate results of policy research and demonstration

5) Assist with the development and maintenance of a database of policy research 

6) Assist with the development and maintenance of a database of public and private health expenditures by source and category on an annual basis
7) Build capacity within the DOH for a healthy policy process
8) Facilitate the consolidation and evaluation of health policy initiatives and reforms.

Reports to: Component Manager for Component I/Director HPDS

This order shall take effect immediately. 

</body>
<sign>BY: ALFREDO R. A. BENGZON, M.D. </sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

