
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>16/4/1993</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 12, s. 1993</docnum> 
<subject>SUBJECT : Subject: Traditional Medicine Program</subject>

<body>
I. BACKGROUND

	The formal and legal health care delivery system in the Philippines is almost exclusively, in the domain of orthodox (Modern-North American/European) medicine. As such, it is high-technology oriented resulting in a continuously foreign dependent and expensive health care delivery.

	In the Philippines, the total cost for drug requirement alone is estimated to be P10 billion a year. It is sad to note, however that the annual health budget of the government is approximately of the same amount only. Furthermore, 55% of the population lives below the poverty line. A survey done in Cebu revealed that only 30 % of the population studied can afford the full cost of their health requirements. Another 30% can partially afford them while, 40% cannot afford entirely the cost of their medicinal requirements. 

 	Considering this situation, it is indeed necessary to review and overhaul the existing health care delivery system. There is a need to develop the traditional and alternative systems of medicine which can offer additional safe and effective hea1th care that is affordable, accessible and acceptab1e to the majority or Filipinos.

II. POLICY

	It shall be the policy of the Department of Health (DOH) to promote and develop traditional systems of medicine that have been found Safe and effective and integrate their use into the national health Care delivery system.

	It shall also the policy of the DOH to undertake activities for the protection and preservation of the country's genetic plant materials.
 
III.  THE TRADITIONAL MEDICINE PROGRAM

   A} Definition

	Traditional medicine is the sum total of ski11s and practices on health care, not necessarily explicable in the context of modern medical, scientific philosophical framework but recognized by the people in order to maintain and improve their health towards the wholeness of their being, the community and society, and their interrelatedness. This is based on culture, history, heritage and consciousness.

	Operationally, the DOH program will focus on Herbal Medicine, Acupuncture/Acupressure, Massage and training of Traditional Birth Attendants (TBA). It remains open to and look into the other forms of trad1tlonal and alternative healing practices.

B. Rationale for Promoting Traditional Medicine 

Traditional med1c1ne Inn has been present in the Philippines long before the application of modern science on health care. It is the people’s own health care system and as such already has advantages over orthodox medicine. It can and it does contribute to scientific and universal medicine. Therefore, its recognition, promotion and development would further ensure its efficacy, safety, availability and wider application at a lower cost. Its development would secure due respect for the people's qualities and the relatively cheap cost in develop and utilize traditional health care also makes it one of the most practical and sustainable strategies in achieving the Department's target of Health for All.

Traditional medicine has a holistic perspective of health. It looks at a person's totality within a wide ecological spectrum. This, ill health or disease is viewed as being brought about by an imbalance or disequilibrium of man in his total ecological system and not only by the causative agent and pathogenic evolution.

	Many of the d1fferent healing modalities of traditional medicine have already been scientifically validated specially in terms of safety and its efficacy in the prevention and cure of various ailments.

Traditiona1 med1c1ne is also a significant resource that can be harnessed to improve the country’s health care delivery. This is evident in a series of World Health Assembly resolutions, calling on member countries to give adequate importance to the development of the traditional medicine as a strategy in achieving better health (WHO Resolution-29,72:130.49; 31.33, 40.33: 41.19; 42.43). Several countries have already successfully utilized traditional and orthodox medicine in their health care delivery system quite successfully. These countries include China} Vietnam, Korea, Japan and Indonesia to name a few. 
 
 
C. Vision
A health Care delivery system where the modern and traditional systems of medicine are effectively utilized in providing health care that is safe, acceptable, accessible and affordable to the Filipino people.

 
   
D. Linkages

The DOH shall also establish intra—agency (Section IV) and multi-sectoral linkages to broaden and deepen the scope of the program and enhance its operationalization (Annex A)
E. Goal/Objectives
GOAL:
	To develop, establish and utilize traditional medicine in the Philippine health care delivery system as one strategy for achieving health for all.

OBJECTIVES:
1. To identify, validate and promote various traditional healing modalities.
2. To generate and develop human, material and technological resources on the various forms of traditional medicine.
3. To secure the involvement of national government agencies (NGAs), non-government organizations (NGOs), and local government units (LGU) in the development and implementation of traditional medicine activities, projects and programs.
4. To strengthen the traditional medicine component in the school curricula and faculty development programs at all level.
5. To protect the indigenous and natural health resource from exploitation by local and foreign entities.

F. Strategies:

       To achieve the program’s goal and objectives, the DOH, in collaboration with the member agencies of the Multi—agency Committee and various NGOs shall implement the following strategies:

1. Establishment of the Traditional Medicine Service
	The Tradition Medicine Service shall be created at the DOH to oversee all traditional medicine activities within and outside of the Department. It shall also ensure the integration of traditional medicine within the existing program of DOH

2. Networking
A system of communication and collaboration with NGOs, LGUs, Traditional Medicine Resource and Research Institutions/Centers, and regulatory and professional bodies involved in health, locally and internationally, shall be established through the Traditional Medicine Division. A close working relationship with researchers, academic institutions and funding agencies shall also be effected. Networking activities shall be undertaken by the Regional Field Health Offices in the provinces.


3. Advocacy
	Activities that will generate public visibility and wider public understanding of Traditional Medicine shall be undertaken. This shall be done through multi-media campaigns, distribution of information/education materials and official pronouncements.

4. Resource Development
	Nationwide training and resource development programs shall be established and conducted. The Department shall also involve itself in institution building.
5. Legislative Agenda
	The development of legislations that will facilitate the utilization, protection, and regulation of traditional medicine shall be undertaken. The Department shall also collaborate with concerned NGOs to work for the passage of legislations beneficial to the program.
6. Research 
	Researches in traditional medicine shall be encouraged, endorsed and initiated through the DOH’s Essential National Health Research Program and hospitals, and the Philippine council for health Research and Development Plan. Technology transfer for research results shall likewise be promoted.
7. Generation of financial resources
	A Traditional Medicine Foundation shall be established to generate and manage funds for traditional medicine projects and activities.
8. Traditional Medicine Utilization
	All DOH hospitals shall be required to use herbal medicine and other traditional medicine modalities proven to be safe and effective. School clinics, industrial clinics, and the private sector shall be encouraged to do likewise.

IV. ORGANIZATION OF THE TRADITIONAL MEDICINE PROGRAM
A. The Traditional Medicine Service shall be created at the DOH for the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the program on the traditional medicine.
B. For the interim period, a Traditional Medicine Division shall be created under the Community Health Service but shall be under the direct supervision of the Chief of Staff and Undersecretary for Operations (Program Manager). The Division shall give advice and staff support to the Secretary on the development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the program. The division shall be under a Program Coordinator (Division Chief) who shall manage the day to day affairs.
	To assist the Program Manager in the development of comprehensive plan a multi-sectoral working committee shall be created to help the Program Manager develop specific policies and the plans on traditional medicine. (Composition and Functions in Annex B)
	The TBA or “Hilot” Program shall continue to be implemented by the Maternal and Child Health Service/Program which shall update the Traditional Medicine Division on its plans and activities for the proper coordination.

	The following services/offices of the Department will likewise provide support and technical assistance to the Traditional Medicine Program:
	Bureau of Food and Drug
	Essential National Health Research
	Office for hospitals and facilities services
	Community health service
	Office for Hospitals and Facilities Services
	Community Heath Service
	Foreign Assistance Coordinating Service
	Office of Legal Affairs (Legal Service)
	The Traditional Medicine Division shall continue to be assisted by the Science and Technology Coordinating Council (STCC) to ensure the collaboration of other agencies (Departments of Environment and Natural Resources, Agriculture, Education, Culture and Sports, Science and Technology, and Foreign Affairs.)
Coordinate with local government units in the propagation of medicinal p1ants in their nurseries. .
	An Organizational chart on the DOH Traditional Medicine Program is presented in Annex C.
V. Funding
	As a priority program, the Department of Health shall endeavor to include this program in the national budgetary allocation and increase its allocation of funds from foreign grants/funding.



</body>
<sign>Juan M. Flavier, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

<body>
ANNEX A.
MULTI-AGENCY COMMITTEE OF TRADITIONAL MEDICINES
Roles of Member Agencies

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
	Assume leadership in the development and implementation of the traditional medicine program:
	a. define directions for program formulation
	b. implement the program
	c. coordination with concerned agencies relating to the integration of traditional medicine into their respective plans/programs.
DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
	Render technical assistance in sourcing foreign funds, i.e.:
	a. training grants to develop local expertise in relevant fields of study
	b. financial support for identified program activities

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, CULTURE AND SPORTS
	Integrate traditional medicine concept and practice in all levels of education including health sciences education and non-formal education through
	a. curricula
	b. faculty development
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
	Provide assistance (through the Department’ regional field offices) to private sector, LGU’s and schools in terms of
	a. propagation or planting materials
	b. technical expertise
	Coordinate with local government units in the propagation of medicinal plants in their nurseries.

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES
	Preserve indigenous and natural health resources through
	a. provision of technical assistance in the production of forest plants/trees with medicinal potentials
	b. protection form exploitation by local and foreign entities
	c. support for environment-friendly programs.


PHILIPPINE COUNCIL FOR HEALTH-RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT-DOST
Support research and development through

a. integration of traditional medicine program in the National Health Research and Development Plan
b. technical/financial grants for R and D activities

Facilitate technology transfer to concerned sectors.

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Policy support through program endorsement to STCC/higher bodies.

       The DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT shall also be asked to send resource persons as necessary.

       ALL AGENCTES involved shall -

a. Develop an action plan for the implementation of the traditional medicine program in their agencies. This will be integrated into their respective medium term development plan.

b. Work towards advocacy and public education on the concept and use Of traditional medicine.


COMMITTEES INVOLVED IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE TRADITIONAL MEDICINE PROGRAM

DOH Working Committee

The Committee is composed of key officials Of the DOH and representatives from the following non—government organizations (NGOs) and academe:

Acupuncture and Therapeutic Research Center (ATRC)
Community Medicine Development Foundation (COMMED)
Women's Resource and Research Center (WRRC)
Epheta Foundation for the Blind, Inc. (Epheta)
Community Management Institute (CMI)
Social Development Research Center (SDRC),
De La Salle University
University of the Philippines, Manila
	College of Public Health
	College of Medicine, Department Of Pharmacology

It is tasked to develop the comprehensive framework/plan of traditional medicine program-of the Department of Health.

DOH Technical Committees

The Committee, likewise composed of representatives from NGOs and the academe will be tasked to develop the operational plan and recommend policies for the traditional medicine program specifically 1n the fields Of herbal medicine, acupuncture, acupressure/massage and other alternative healing practices.

STCC Multi-agency Committee

The Committee is composed of the Undersecretary/Assistant Secretary Of t1e following government agencies:

Department of Health
Department Of Foreign Affairs

Department of Education, Culture and Sports
Department of Agriculture

Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Department of Science and Technology

The Committee will approve the DOH traditional medicine for presentation to the President and the Cabinet and endorse policies on traditional medicine to the Secretary of Health and the STCC.

    
STCC Technical Working Group
A working Group, composed of the technical Staff from the member agencies of the Multi-agency Committee 1i11 assist this Committee in the review of the traditional medicine program and identification of specific areas of Cooperation between the DOH and relevant government agencies in the cooperation between the DOH and relevant government agencies in- the program's implementation.


</body>
<sign>Juan M. Flavier, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
