<doctype>AdministratiVe Order</doctype>
<docnum>No. 19 - 51, 1993</docnum>
<subject>Subject: Procedures for coordinating legislative action within the
DOH and for formulating timely responses to proposed and
pending legislation.</subject>

<body>
Principal responsibility for legislative action rests with the
Secretary of Health and the Undersecretary and Chief of Staff with
support from the following organizational entities:

* Departmental Legislative Liaison Office (DLLO): established
by Executive Order in every Department the DLLO must advocate
for a DOH legislative agenda with the Executive Branch and
track legislation in the Congress.-

* Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS): coordinates.
development of the DOH policy and legislative agenda, and
coordinates DOH response to legiSlative initiatives emanating
from Congress. It will also take a proactive approach toward
developing 'the policy analysis capacities of the other
entities involved in the DOH legislative process.

* DOH Technical Services and Regional Health Offices: provide
technical input into DOH legislative and policy agenda, and technical input to DOH-response to legislative initiatives
emanating from CongreSS, and make appearances before
Congressional Committees.

To systematize and facilitate DOH responses to legislative actions,
the following process shall be established and maintained.

I. Legislative Actions Initiated by the DOH

The DOH will take a Eutective approach toward issues requiring
legislative actions using the process proposed below:

1. The DOH will develop and maintain a dynamic and evolving
legislative agenda which contains the priority DOH policy
issues requiring legislative action. Technical input required
for formulation of the legislative agenda will be sought from
the DOH technical services and the. DOH Regional Health
Offices. The HPDS will coordinate and facilitate the process
for development o_f the Legislative Agenda.


2. Once a legislative agenda has been adopted, the DLLO will be
responsible.for advocating for Executive Branch.sponsorship+of
the legislative agenda. 

II. Legislative Actions Emanating from Congress

There are numerous legislative actions emanating from Congress
which require DOH reactions and responses. This will require a
process which is reactive in a timely fashion. A process for
reactive response in) Congressional legislative initiatives is
described below:

1. The DLLO will monitor and track legislative initiatives from
Congress which impact the health sector. .AS DOH responses are
required the DLLO will refer these to the USEC/COS.

2. The USEC/COS, with staff support from the HPDS will request
technical input and/or attendance at Congressional hearings
from the appropriate Technical Service or Regional Health
Office. In instances where technical input must be sought
outside the -DOH, the.HPDS will coordinate obtaining input from
external SOUI’CQS .

3. Once technical input has been _obtained from either DOH
Technical Services, Regional. Health. Offices, or external
sources, the USEC/COS, with staff support from the HPDS,'will
consolidate the responses into a DOH position paper through a
consultative process-and forward it to the Congress through
the DLLO with copies furnished to the concerned Technical
Service/Regional Health Office. DOH personnel _ from the
Technical Services or regional Health Offices will be
requested to appear at Congressional Hearings.

4. The DLLO will monitor the responses once they have been sent
back.to Congress and.will accompany DOH Staff at Congressional
Hearings.

.A flow chart and a detailed description of the system for
formulating DOH responses to proposed and pending legislation is
enclosed as an Annex 1 to this Administrative Order.

The Regional Health Offices shall designate a Regional Policy and
Legislative Coordinator with the-following responsibilities:

* liaise with the HPDS on all DOH policy and legislative
issues.
* formulate a regional legislative agenda and initiate

regional level.pclicy actions

* liaise with local congressman in the region


   
* liaise with the-Local Government/NGO Community Assistance
Division in the.RHO regarding municipal and provincial
legislative initiatives.

This order shall take effect immediately.


ANNEX 1'

(l)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(3)

SYSTEM FOR DOH RESPONSE TO
PROPOSED AND PENDING LEGISLATION

Legislation relevant to DOH goals, whether being reviewed in
the Committee on Health or other Congressional Committees, is
identified by the Departmental Legislative Liaison Office
(DLLO) representative in the House or the Senate; or referred
to the USEC/COS throngh the DLLO.

DLLO will prepare and send a form letter, signed by the
USEC/COS, to the relevant Technical Service/RHO requesting
preparation of a DOH position paper on the legislation. A
copy of the request is sent to the HPDS. A copy of the form
letter appears as ANNEX 1. An outline for the position paper

.appears as ANNEX 2.

HPDS will decide whether the request for comments/position
paper should be sent to other Technical Services/RHOs, and
whether it should be sent to other external agencies, such as
NGOs or universities, for further comment. .

Comments and position papers will be submitted by the
Technical Services/RHOS and External Agencies to the HPDS,
which will be responsible for their- consolidation into a DOH
Position Paper. A copy of the comments or position papers
will be furnished to the DLLO.

HPDS will. conduct the necessary consultations with the
Technical Services/RHOs and external Agencies required to
synthesize comments into a coherent position paper, and will
submit the draft position paper to the USEC/COS and the

Secretary. v

Secretary of Health and the USEC/COS will review the position
paper with technical input from the HPDS, DLLO, and the
relevant technical service/RHO, or external agencies.
Comments from this review will be incorporated into the
position paper by the HPDS, which will produce a final DOH
position paper on_the legislation.

Secretary of Health will submit the formal DOH position paper
to Congress through the DLLO.

Secretary of Health or- his designee -will appear' before

Congress to respond.to Congressional inquiries, accompanied.by
the Service Director'from the relevant.Technical Service/RHO.
</body>
<sign></sign>
<signtitle></signtitle>