Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80

<date>12/28/1993</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 22 S. 1993</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES FOR THE ACCREDITATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR ORGANIZATIONS (PSOs) FOR HEALTH CARE AND DEVELOPMENT</subject>

<body>
I. INTRODUCTION

The 1987 Philippine Constitution contains provisions for the promotion and participation of the private sector including the nongovernment organizations (NGOs) and the people's organization (POs) in government especially in policies and programs that affect the depressed and underserved communities in both urban and rural areas in the country.

NEDA Board Resolution No. 2 S. 1989 mandates all government agencies to establish NGO Desk to facilitate partnership-building with NGOs as well as with POs.

The Local Government Code, likewise, ensures NGO and PO participation in local development councils and in other local government units.

Corollary to the foregoing provisions, the Department of Health (DOH) has established a Public Private Sector Collaboration (PPSC) Desk and issued Administrative Order 112, s. 1991 also known as "Department Policy on Collaboration Between Public and Private Sector on Health Policies and Programs" to encourage PSOs to participate in policy formulation, program development and implementation and in other appropriate processes to improve delivery of health care services in the country.

To ensure effective partnership between PSOs and DOH, an accreditation system is hereby established.

II. PURPOSE OF ACCREDITATION

Accreditation of PSOs in the health sector is meant to enable NGOs/POs and other private organizations to officially participate in the various programs and services of the Department as well as to enable them to directly or indirectly avail/share of financial, technical or other allowable forms of assistance to improve health service delivery.

This accreditation, as it formalizes the partnership between the Department and PSOs, is envisioned to continually upgrade the entire health development system towards improved health for all and eventually health in the hands of the people.

III. DEFINITION OF TERMS

a) Private Sector Organizations (PSOs) are composed of Private (for profit) Business Groups, International Funding Agencies, Private Colleges and Universities, and NGOs which include the following:

* People's Organizations
* Socio-Civic Groups
* Religious Organizations
* Social Development Agencies
* Professional/Business Foundations/Societies/Associations
* Advocacy Groups
* Private Voluntary Organizations (PVO)

b. Nongovernment Organizations (NGOs) are private, non-profit voluntary organizations committed to the task of socio-economic development established primarily for service. People's organization (POs) and cooperatives are included in this definition.

NGOs/POs cooperatives and other private voluntary organizations are also perceived and defined as organizations that are:

* established primarily for social, civic, religious, charitable and welfare purposes.
* relatively small and flexible structures with their services focused on marginal groups in the rural and urban areas.
* undertaking activities covering a wide spectrum ranging from technical aspects of productive activity to such socio-economic aspects as planning and information systems, education, organizations, etc.
* having farmers, women, fisherfolks, indigenous peoples, urban poor, youth and the poor, in general.
* generally, people-oriented with a firm conviction on the need for people's participation in decisions and processes affecting them, and
* generally, having formal registration with certain government agencies either as foundation, association or voluntary organization.

c) Accreditation is an official acknowledgment of the merits of an organization in meeting the standards of DOH to participate in the delivery of health policies and programs, and availment of financial and technical assistance from or through DOH.

d) Collaboration includes consultations, participation, partnership, alliances and various kinds, levels, and scopes of mutual involvements between DOH entities and other government and nongovernment/private agencies and organizations operating for service.

e) Service delivery refers to assistance in direct health service delivery such as clinical management, care/case treatment, sharing of technical expertise, laboratory services, distribution of medicine and other medical supplies, research and manufacture of health and health-related products, environmental sanitation, inspection and monitoring, socio-economic and psychosocial rehabilitation.

f) Financial assistance refers to direct or indirect assistance by DOH to PSOs in terms of funds support for health service delivery, inputs provision, and support activities.

g) Technical assistance refers to non-monetary direct or indirect assistance of the DOH to enhance the capability of health care and development workers to effectively deliver programs and services. Technical assistance may be in the form of research, information-sharing, training and education, advocacy and other capability-building programs and activities.

h) Health care and development workers refer to government, including DOH, and nongovernment agencies and organizations, groups and individuals managing and implementing health and health-related activities.

i) Program participation refers in particular to the involvement of PSOs in the decision-making, planning, implementation and monitoring an evaluation of health programs.

IV. THE ACCREDITATION SYSTEM

The accreditation system shall be continually improved to be more responsive to health trends and development vis-a-vis the changing needs of its clientele. The system covers the accreditation process, criteria and requirements for accrediting applicants, administration of the accreditation system, and other pertinent rules and regulations.

A. The Accreditation Process

The accreditation of PSOs will be carried out by both the central office and the regional health units.

The central office shall respect whatever action the regional units will make on the application of PSOs for accreditation. Personal motives, political affiliation, biases and other forms on inequity in accreditation shall never be the basis of the process.

The common basic elements and procedures to be adopted by both the central office and the regional health units shall be the following:

1. FILING OF APPLICATION FORM

1.1. Any PSO intending to collaborate with the DOH shall apply in writing to the accrediting health office where the applicant is based. Community Health Service (CHS) at the national level, and the NGO/LGU/Community Coordinating and Mobilization Division at the Regional Health Offices level.

In case of a PSO operating in more than one region, the application shall be assessed by the Regional Office where the agency is based. Thus, one certificate of accreditation may be issued to a single PSO per region of accreditation.

1.2. The Head of the accrediting office/division shall acknowledge receipt of the application within five (5) working days, register such application in a Registry of Applications for Accreditation and send the prescribed application form to the applicant (See Appendix I).

1.3. The applicant PSO shall accomplish the prescribed PPSC Accrdn. Form I and Form II and submit the same with the following requirements:

a. Certified true copy of Certificate of Registration from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including approved Articles of Incorporation and Constitution and By-Laws:
b. Manual of Operation (if any) or a brief profile, reflecting the following items:

i. vision and mission of the PSO;
ii. its service population/groups;
iii. geographical area of coverage;
iv. strategies, programs and services;
v. estimated annual budget and source/s of funding; and
vi. other assets used for operations.

c. Certified list of members of the governing board and staff of the PSO, their position title, nationality and home addresses;
d. A two-year work and financial plan which indicates technical and financial viability or stability for said period, particularly to include the following:

i. problem(s) being addressed;
ii. strategies and corresponding programs/projects
iii. work plan and corresponding budget for administration and operation;
iv. sources of funds/resources; and
v. resource generation strategy and sustainability schemes to ensure continuity of work/operation.

e. For a PSO already operating, annual report for the year preceding the period of application which shall include the following:

i. programs/projects and interventions undertaken, categories and number of clients served and in what geographical areas, problems encountered and how these were solved, major facilitating and inhibiting factors, and lessons learned;
ii. number and position of paid personnel and volunteers involved in the period covered; and
iii. a general and brief financial report for the year covered by the report.

2. ASSESSMENT OF APPLICATION

2.1. The accrediting office shall review the application and attached documents within five (5) working days after receipt of the same based on the following criteria and requirements:

a. Completion of all forms and documents as specified in the foregoing section (A.1);
b. Compatibility of PSO's principles, vision, mission and thrusts with those of the government and the DOH;
c. Relative financial, human and physical resource stability of the PSO;
d. PSO has at least one regular registered/accredited medical, allied or paramedical personnel;
e. Realistic strategies, programs and services vis-a-vis available resources;
f. Population groups being served or targeted belong to sectors identified by the DOH; e.g. needy, deprived, underprivileged, depressed, vulnerable, etc. (as may be defined by the DOH);
g. PSO must have been currently engaged in health or health-related activities for at least one year; and
h. With integrity and good reputation.

2.2. The accrediting office may validate the data and information provided by the applicant by visiting the PSO site(s) of operation. Within 15 days from receipt of application the accrediting office shall send an acknowledgment letter, notifying the PSO of its visit;

Validation shall include interview or meeting with those concerned and observation of activities of the PSO at the sites of operation.

2.3. The accreditation office/committee may also refer the application of the PSO to offices or units of the DOh whose programs and services cover the area of interest of the applicant to solicit their recommendation for a sound decision on the application.

2.4. The accrediting office shall consolidate all recommendations and comments on the application and formulate within 5 days from receipt of all consolidated documents a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application; and

2.5. This recommendation shall be submitted to the PSO Accreditation Board duly created for the purpose (national or regional as the case may be) of approval or disapproval of the application for accreditation.

The Board members shall meet for this purpose.

3. ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF ACCREDITATION

3.1. Within 5 working days after approval of the PSO Accreditation Board, a Certificate of Accreditation shall be prepared by the PPSC Secretariat and recommend for approval/signing by the Secretary of Health.

The certificate shall bear the official seal of the DOH.

3.2. A certificate number is assigned by the accrediting office and recorded in its central Registry of Applications for Accreditation; and

3.3. The accrediting office shall forward the certificate to the accredited PSO and furnish a copy to the records office of the DOH (at the central or regional level as the case may be) as soon as possible.

4. FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS

4.1. If an applicant PSO fails to meet the requirements for accreditation, the head of the organization shall be notified within 5 working days after receipt of application, stating the areas for non-compliance and suggestions for meeting the prescribed requirements;

4.2. The applicant may request further assistance from the accrediting office in writing to facilitate compliance within one month from the date of notice of non-compliance;

4.3. If inspite of the provision of technical assistance by the accrediting office, the applicant still fails to meet the requirements, then, the application is disapproved.

All documents of the PSO shall be returned without prejudice to future application.

Notice of disapproval shall be given as soon as possible.

5. GROUND FOR SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION

5.1. The Certificate of Accreditation shall be suspended when the PSO suspends its operations and notifies the accrediting office in writing; 

5.2. The Certificate of Accreditation shall be revoked for any of the following reasons:

a. Violation of any existing laws of the land;
b. Mismanagement of funds;
c. Exploitation, abuse or neglect of its service population/groups;
d. Failure to function as a health care and development PSO;
e. When suspension extends beyond one year; and
f. When the PSO ceases its operation and notifies the accrediting office in writing.

6. COMPLAINTS AND EVALUATION OF COMPLAINTS AGAINST ACCREDITED PSO

6.1. Complaints on the above grounds for suspension and revocation as well as on other legitimate reasons against an accredited PSO shall be written and duly signed by the complainant. Only signed complaints shall be entertained.

6.2. An investigation shall be conducted by the accrediting office within 15 working days from the receipt of complaints;

6.3. Based on the findings of the investigation, the accrediting office shall submit its recommendation and all supporting documents to the Secretary within 5 working days from the completion of the assessment;

6.4. The Secretary shall render a decision on the complaint within 15 working days from the date of submission of the assessment report of the accrediting office;

6.5. The Secretary may suspend or revoke the Certificate of Accreditation based on the foregoing grounds as mentioned in number 5 or on other acceptable grounds within the laws of the land; and

6.6. The PSO against which complaints have been filed may file a request for reconsideration of the decision of the Secretary within 5 working days from the receipt of said decision.

7. RENEWAL OF CERTIFICATE OF ACCREDITATION

The Certificate of Accreditation is effective for three (3) years only. After the third year from the date of accreditation, the same NGO shall apply for renewal of certificate following the same procedures;

PSOs whose Certificates of Accreditation have been suspended may re-apply for renewal of accreditation following the same requirements as in applying for a new certificate.

8. ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACCREDITATION SYSTEM

1. Accreditation at the National Level:

Application for accreditation at the national level shall be submitted to the Community Health Service which shall serve as the accrediting office at the central office. A PSO Accreditation Board at the national level or at the central office shall be created to make decisions on the recommendations of the accrediting office.

The PSO Accreditation Board shall be composed of officials from both the DOH and the NGO sector and duly appointed by the Secretary of Health whose functions are:

i. Approve or disapprove applications of PSOs for accreditation by the DOH based on the recommendations of concerned DOH offices.
ii. Formulate policies or set policy directions for accreditation of PSOs; and
iii. Advise the DOH through its concerned offices/units with respect to the management and implementation of the PSO Accreditation System.

2. Accreditation at the Regional Level:

Applications for accreditation at the regional level shall be submitted to the Office of the Regional Director which is considered as the accrediting office in the region. The PSSC Desk under the Office of the Regional Director shall serve as accreditation staff.

A PSO Accreditation Board at the regional level shall be created to formulate decisions on the recommendations of the regional accrediting office. Members of the regional PSO Accreditation Board shall come from the regional health unit and region-based NGOs who shall be duly appointed by the Secretary upon the recommendation of the Regional Director.

3. The Community Health Service (CHS) shall be the coordinating unit for the entire accreditation system. The CHS shall provide technical assistance to all regional health units on the operationalization and maintenance of the system.

4. Funds, resources and other support items for the operationalization of the accreditation system shall be included in all work and financial plans of the CHS and all regional health offices (RHOs).

5. The CHS and the RHOs may initiate programs, projects or measures to enhance the accreditation system.

B. Any rules and regulations that are inconsistent with the foregoing sections are hereby revoked and strict compliance with the above is endorsed.

V. ACCREDITATION FEE

No fee shall be charged against PSOs applying for accreditation.

This Order takes effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>JUAN M. FLAVIER, MD., MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

AOABoard/ppsc1/chay