Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>20/1/1994</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 23,s. 1994</docnum>

<subject>Subject: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DOH MANAGEMENT TEAM FOR THE HEALTH FINANCE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (USAID PROJECT NO. 492-0446) </subject>
   
<body>
The Department of Health implementing structure for the Health Finance Development Project (HFDP) has been revised in Department Order no, 23 s. 1994 dated Jan. 18, 1994 in response to this structural reorganization of the HFDP necessitated by the evolving priorities of the DOH and budgetary constraints being experienced by USAID. Selected DOH staff and organizational units were designated to be responsible for the management 0f the project and its five program areas. This administrative order defines the roles, relationships, and
Responsibilities of the key DOH project management personnel. These were previously outlined in A0 l2l-A s. 1992 and amended by AO 6 s. 1992. As a result of the revised DOH implementing Structure for HFDP, A0 121-A s. 1992 must be revised.

       Also included in this order are the roles and responsibilities of the Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS), which was created by Department Order No. 370-I s. 1991 as a focal point within the Department of Health for Health Policy, and as a secretariat for the HFDP.

 

Below are the role and responsibilities of the DOH Project Management team for HFDP.


1. PROJECT-DIRECTOR: This position will be filled by the Undersecretary and Chief of Staff and will have the following responsibilities: 

1) Provide policy direction and general management oversight for the HFDP.
2) Brief the Secretary of. Health on the progress and outputs produced through the project
3) Approve programmatic plans which establish the outputs, general directions and fund commitment levels on behalf of the DOH and endorse these to USAID.
4) Issue directives which govern the project’ organization and management, and the creation of structural or ad hoc organizational units.
5) Conduct periodic meetings at least quarterly to monitor the progress made by the project toward achieving anticipated outputs.

6)Represent the HFDP to DOH management, USAID and in interdepartmental and multi-sectoral policy fora.

2. PROJECT MANAGER: This position will be filled by the Undersecretary for Health Facilities, Standards, and Regulations, and will have the following responsibilities:

	l) provide direct management oversight for the HFDP

	2) provide general supervision for the UPecon cooperative agreement and the MSH contract.
	3)supervise the implementation of activities in the five program areas 
	4)review and approve comprehensive annual operational plans, and revisions or modifications to the annual operational plans, and endorse to USAID.
	5) monitor progress toward achieving benchmarks and outputs agreed upon for HFDP', and approve benchmarks once they have been satisfactorily fulfilled.
	6) submit monthly progress reports to the Project Director and senior DOH management. 
	7) approve all training activities funded through the UPecon cooperative agreement and the MSH institutional contract.
	8) approve all publications issued through the HFDP

	9) Coordinate HFDP- with other DOH, USAID, or other donor-funded activities related to HFDP. 
	10) liaise with USAID on all HFDP related matters

REPORTS TO: Project Director

3. DEPUTY PROJECT MANAGER This position will be filled by the Chief of-
Hospital, Rizal- Medical Center, and will have the following responsibilities:

1) assist the Project Manager with the following responsibilities:
	-Provide direct management oversight for the HFDP
	-Supervise the implementation of activities in the five program areas
	-liaise with USAID on HFDP related matters

2) provide direct supervision for the UPecon cooperative agreement and the MSH institutional contract.
3) coordinate the preparation of
	-HFDP programmatic plans
	-annual operational' plans for MSH and Upecon
	-comprehensive integrated annual operational plans
	-revisions to programmatic or operational plans

4) develop and implement a system which monitors progress in the five program areas, the UPecon cooperative agreement, and the MSH contract. ‘

5) monitor the disbursement of funds from the MSH contract and the UPecon
cooperative agreement. 
6) prepare and submit a monthly monitoring report to the Project Manager which describes the progress and pace of implementation, and reports the disbursement
7) conduct an annual performance evaluation of the UPecon cooperative agreement and the MSH contract.

REPORTS To: Project Manager

4. PROGRAM MANAGERS: The HFDP has five program areas managed by the DOH organizational unit with functional responsibility for the technical content of the program areas. A Program Manager has been assigned responsibility for each program area. The following DQH organizational units and personnel have been designated for each program area:

• The National Health Insurance program area will be managed by the Philippine Medical Care Commission (PMCC). The Program Manager will be Vice-Chairman of the Philippine Medical Care Commission, assisted by the Executive Director (PMCC), and the Chief Program Development Services, PMCC.

• The Devolution program area will be managed by the Local Government Assistance, and Monitoring Service (LGAMS). The Program Manager will be the Officer-in—Charge of LGAMS. 
•  The Public Resource Management program area will be managed by the Internal Planning Service (IPS). The Program Manager will be the Officer—in-Charge of the IPS.

•  The Standards, Licensing, and Regulation program area will be managed by the Hospital Operations and-Maintenance Service/Bureau for Licensing and Regulation (OQMS/BLR). The Program Manager will be the Service Director for HOMS, who is simultaneously the Officer-in-Charge for BLR.
• The Health Policy Process program area will be managed by the Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS). The Program Manager will be the Officer-in-Charge of the HPDS.

REPORTS TO: Project Manager
 

The Program Managers will have the following responsibilities:

l) achieve the outputs expected from each program area. 
2) manage day-to-day activities in their respective program areas.
3) formulate annual Operational plans for their respective program areas
4) supervise the activities Of MSH and Upecon within their respective program areas
5)provide DOH approvals for terms of reference and the allocation of funds for project activities in accordance with guidelines in the annual Operational plans.
6) Provide DOH approvals for scopes of work for consultants hired by UPecon or MSH for activities within their respective program areas

7) Recommend proposed revisions or modifications in annual operational plans to the Project Manager through the Deputy Project Manager

8) Prepare quarterly and annual reports which describe progress toward achievement of outputs for the respective program areas.
9)Coordinate and integrate HFDP activities and related USAID funded projects with the technical areas for which they have functional responsibility within the DOH.

5. HEALTH POLICY} DEVELOPMENT STAFF (HPDS).

In addition to its responsibility for managing the Health Policy Process program area, the HFDS will function as the DOM administrative secretariat for HFDP. In this capacity the HPDS will have the following responsibilities:

1)provide staff support to the Project Director, Project Manager, and Deputy Project Manager.

2) Serve as the administrative liaison within the DOH for USAID.

3) function as the secretariat for all project management committees and monitoring meetings.
4) serve as a focal point for collecting, storing, cataloging, and disseminating information and reports produced by HFDP.

Administrative Orders No. 121-A s. 1992, and No. 6 s. 1992 are hereby modified accordingly, and all orders, instructions , and/or directives or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Administrative Order are hereby rescinded.

This order shall take effect immediately.

  
 
  
</body>
<sign>Juan M. Flavier, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
