Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>10/03/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 16-Cs. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Awarding of Foreign and Local Scholarships</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE

The health personnel is the most previous resource of the health system. The Department of Health recognizes the vital role of its health human resources, and priorities them as an important organizational investment. The rational and balanced development of our health human resources are necessary to ensure the efficient and effective delivery of health services to the Filipino people.

Fellowships and training grants, both at the local and foreign levels, are opportunities for the professional growth of our health human resources. A rational and efficient selection and nomination process in the awarding of these fellowships and training grants are therefore essential in order to realise its goals and objectives. Based on a comprehensive review of the present procedures in the Department of Health regarding the awarding of fellowships and training grants, the following guidelines are hereby formulated to rationalise the said system, and to obtain maximum benefits from these training opportunities.



II. CLASSIFICATION OF TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES

A. According to manner of acquisition:

1. Programmed/requested by the DOH as part of technical assistance.

2. Offered by international agencies/institutions.
2.a. on a regular/annual basis
2.b. only on a periodic basis

B. According to functional requirements:
Attendance to technical or management courses:
1. As a student
2. As participant
3. As an adviser/consultan

C. According to type of training:

1. Fellowships:

a. Formal degree courses, extending over 6 months or more which entail a more rigid prerequisite including a satisfactory academic performance to qualify for conferment of a diploma or academic title.

b. Special Courses which focus on specific subjects requiring less than 6 months of training.

2. Study tours which are on-site observation and interaction of another country’s experience regarding a specific subject.

3. Meetings/Conferences/Seminars which are gatherings of country representatives and experts to exchange ideas on a specific are of concern.

4. Consultancy services which involve the invitation of country experts to provide expertise for a specific task in a foreign country.



III. GENERAL GUIDELINES

1. The awarding of scholarships and training grants shall all times conform to a policy of transparency in all its procedures and transactions.

2. All foreign-assisted scholarship programs shall be coursed through the DOH-Foreign Assistance Coordination Service (FACS).

3. All foreign assisted training opportunities offered randomly to the Dept. of Health shall be approved by the Secretary of Health.

4. Training opportunities offered to the DOH which are not health-related, shall be approved by the EXECOM before it is offered to any office for nomination.

5. The awarding of scholarships and training grants shall be coordinated by the Health Manpower Development and Training Service (HMDTS) through a process described in Section III and based on an approved DOH Health Human Resource Development Plan.

6. The DOH Health Human Resource Development Plan shall be the consolidated annual and Medium-Term agency plan based on the health human resource development plan to be submitted by the individual offices and units of the Dept. of Health.

7. A database information system on foreign scholarships/grants shall be established by the FACS and HMDTS and an evaluation process shall by formulated for the continuous monitoring and assessment of the training program.

8. The processing of all nomination documents shall be completed within a maximum period of one month.



IV. FLOW OF NOMINATION PROCESS

1. All invitations for foreign scholarships shall be addressed to the Secretary of Health: Attention FACS.

2. All invitations for temporary adviser or consultancy shall be evaluated and decided by the EXECOM.

3. The invitations for scholarships shall be transmitted to the HMDTS thru FACS. HMDTS shall be responsible for assigning the invitations to the concerned offices/units based on the DOH HMRD Plan.

4. To qualify for nomination the following criteria must be met:

a. The training scholarship must conform with the training needs as submitted by the program/office/unit.

b. The nominee must preferably be a regular employee of the DOH.

c. The nominee has not availed of any previous scholarship for the last five years.

5. The HMDTS shall convenes a Selection Committee to make the final decision among the nominees submitted for a given scholarship, and which shall be composed of the following:

a. Undersecretary and Chief of Staff or representative
b. Undersecretary of the concerned office/unit or representative
c. Assistant secretary of the concerned office/unit or representative
d. Director of the concerned office/unit

The Selectien Committee shall award the nomination to the most deserving candidate based on the following criteria:

a. Performance ——————————————————————————— 30%
b. Duties and responsibilities ——————————— 40%
c. Attitude assessment ——————————————————— 15%
d. Years of service —————————————————————— 10%
e. With no previous foreign scholarship —— 5%

6. The Selection Committee shall likewise designate an alternate nominee in the event that the official nominee is unable to pursue his/her fellowship, or in the event that the nomination is disapproved by the Secretary of Health.

7. In the event that there is only nominee for the particular scholarship, his qualification shall 1ikewise be evaluated by the Selection Committee. This shall apply to nominations for consultancy or temporary advisers.

8. The Secretary of Health shall approve the official nomination of the selected nominee, for endorsement to the donor agency, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Staff.

9. Upon acceptance by the donor agency of the official nomination, the selected candidate shall prepare the necessary travel documents with assistance from FACS. The OMS shall be informed and furnished a copy of the donor agency’s acceptance of the candidate.

10. FACS shall prepare the necessary request for travel authority addressed to the President through the Secretary of Health.

11. HMDTS shall brief all selected nominees for scholarship, regarding the terms and conditions of the fellowship and other relevant issues. Likewise, a pre- and post-training briefing with the concerned undersecretary shall be conducted.

12. Within one month upon the completion of training, all fellows shall formulate and submit a re-entry plan specifically focused on the subject of the fellowship. The implementation of the re-entry plan shall be monitored by the HMDTS, which shall submit a progress report to the Chief of Staff and the Secretary.



IV. MONITORING AND EVALUATION OF FELLOWSHIPS PROGRAM

1. The FACS shall regularly submit a semi-annual updated report of available scholarships to the Secretary of Health through the Chief of Staff.

2. For evaluation purposes, an evaluation questionnaire regarding the relevance of the scholarship shall be formulated by the HDMTS and responded to by the scholar immediately upon completion of training.

3. The scholar shall submit a report to the HMDTS on the progress of implementation of his re-entry plan within a year after completion of his/her training.


This order shall take effect immediately upon approval of the Secretary of Health.

</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO, JR, MD, MHA</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

