Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  


<date>02/28/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 6 s., 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DOH MANAGEMENT TEAM FOR THE INTEGRATED FAMILY PLANNING AND MATERNAL HEALTH PROJECT (USAID Project No 492-0480)</subject>


<body>


The DOH implementing structures for the IFPMHP were outlined in Department Order No. 65-B s. 1995 dated Feb. 28. Department of Health personnel were assigned responsibility for the management of the project and its three components. This Administrative Order deﬁnes the roles, relationships and responsibilities of key Department of Health management personnel for the Integrated Family Planning and Maternal Health Project (IFPMHP). Also included to this Administrative Order are the responsibilities of the Project Steering Committee that will assist the Project Director, and the Advisory Committees that will assist the Component Managers.

 

I. Project Director: This position will be ﬁlled by the Undersecretary for Public Health and will have the following responsibilities:

1. Provide policy direction and general management oversight for the project;

2. Brief the Secretary of Health and the Chief of Staff on project plans and activities;

3. Approve project-wide plans budgets and reports on behalf of DOH and endorse these plans to USAID;

4. Issue directives governing the project's organization and management and the creation of structural or ad hoc organizational units;

5. Conduct meetings at least quarterlv to monitor the progress made by the project toward achieving anticipated outputs;

6. Represent the project to DOH management and to the highest levels of the government; 

7. Chair the project Steering Committee;

8. Supervise the Project Manager.



II. Project Manager: This position will be ﬁlled by the Assistant to the Undersecretary of Public Health for Women's and Children’s Health and will have the following responsibilities:

“missing text”

toward achieving annual benchmarks and outputs; and approve benchmarks once they have been fulﬁlled;

3. Brief the Project Director on project plans, budgets, activities, outputs and any major issues facing the project;

4. Ensure the effective coordination of activities among the three project components;

5. Ensure the effective coordination between IFPMHP and related DOH programs and projects;

6. Approve all publications and media campaigns produced under IFPMHP;

7. Submit quarterly reports to the Project Director for endorsement to USAID;

8. Provide for project monitoring and evaluation;

9. Serve as the primary contact for the project on behalf of the government with USAID and other donors;

10. Serve as the primary spokesperson for the project in the media and other public fora;

11. Maintain ﬁles of key project documents;

12. Supervise the Component Managers and the staff of the project management office.


Reports to: Project Director



III. Project Component Managers: IFPMHP has three components, each of which will have a Component Manager. The following DOH organizational mats and personnel have been designated as component managers:


Component 1, National Services, will he managed by the Officer in Charge, Family Planning Services. This component will include the following subcomponents: 

a) Logistics
b) IECM
c) Training
d) Operations Research
e) Voluntary Surgical Contraception
f) Policy Planning
g) National Program Monitoring


Component 2, NGO Strengthening, will be managed. by the Service Director, Noncommunicable Diseases. This component will include the following subcomponents:

a) NGOs
b) Social Marketing
c) Industrial Sector


Compound 3, Performance—Based Program, will be managed by the Ofﬁcer in Charge, Maternal and Child Health Services.

The component managers will have the following responsibilities:

1. Formulate annual plans and budgets for the component in consultation with the collaborating agencies; recommend any proposed revisions to the plan and budget to the Project Manager; 

2. Oversee the implementation of plans for the component and achieve the expected outrun;

3. Brief the Project Manager on project activities, progress toward outputs and any major issues facing the project component;

4. Submit quarterly and annual progress reports for the component and its subcomponents, in consultation with the collaborating agencies; 

5. Conduct an annual performance evaluation of the collaborating agencies; 

6. Ensure that subcomponent activities are well coordinated and that IFPMHP activities are coordinated with related programs and projects; 

7. Ensure that project participants adhere to project-wide procedures for administration and coordination; 

8. Approve activities, scopes of work, selection of consultants and travel plans;

9. Chair the Component Advisory Committee;


Report to: Project Manager


The Steering Committee will advise the Project Director on policy, management, and coordination issues with regard to IFPMHP, and will have the following responsibilities:

1. Advise the Project Director on policy matters;

2. Advise on the organization and management of the project;

3. Advise on the coordination of project components;

4. Advise on the integration of the project with other DOH programs and projects;

5. Ensure that project activities reﬂect government wide and DOH policies and priorities;

6. Ensure that the project is regularly evaluated. 


The Component Advisory Committees will advise the Component Managers on operational issues pertaining to their respective Components, and will have the following responsibilities:

1. Act on policy and operational issues with major implications for the project that could not be resolved at the component level; 

2. Advise on the planning and implementation of component activities;

3. Advise on the organization and management of the component;

4. Provide guidance on the appropriateness and acceptability of project strategies and materials;

5. Ensure that project activities reflect the needs of consumers and other stakeholders; 

6. Advise on the coordination of project subcomponents;

7. Advise on the integration of the project with other DOH programs and projects;

8. Advise on the monitoring and evaluation of the component.


This order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>Dr. Jaime Z. Galvez-Tan, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>

