Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
SAN LAZARO COMPOUND, RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ, MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL. NO. 711-60-80  


<date>04/10/1995</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>NO. 8 s. 1995</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: ROLES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE DOH REPRESENTATIVES TO LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND SUPPORT OF THE NATIONAL AND REGIONAL HEALTH OFFICES.</subject>


<body>

In order to substantially carry out the Department of Health RULES AND REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OF 1991, Chapter 3. Sec. 10, Chapter 11, Sec 45, Chapter 12, Sec. 47, the DOH Integrated Regional Field Offices (DIRFO) should provide support for DOH Representatives to LGUs.

A DOH representative to the Local Health Board (LHB), under the supervision of the DIRFO, shall be expected to:

1. Advise LGUs through the Local Health Board in the local planning and implementation of health programs;


2. Identify local health services and facilities that require assistance from the DOH and/or other agencies, and recommend appropriate action for the purpose, to the Local Health Board and to DlRFO;


3. Assist the Regional Licensing Team by advising the LGUs, other agencies and the community, on the laws, standards and regulations on health, including quarantine laws and food, drug and health devices safety;


4. Advise the Local Health Board on DOH standards, regulations and criteria in the accreditation of health facilities like hospitals, clinic, sanitaria and the like, which are managed and operated by LGUs;


5. Facilitate LGU compliance, in coordination with the regional/national monitoring teams, on the following DOH areas of concern:

5.1  Availability of data relative to the LGUs' actual and committed resources in carrying out devolved basic health services

5.2 DOH policies and standards on drug procurement to ensure safe, quality, low-priced drugs and strictly in accordance with the National Drug Formulary

5.3 DOH policies on health human resources development including continuing training and education programs and competency-enhancement (or capability building) efforts for devolved health personnel and other LHB members concerned;


6. Facilitate the monitoring and provision of assistance in the implementation of DOH-initiated programs in his/her area of responsibility, including but not limited to the following:

6.1 Comprehensive Health Care Agreements (CHCA)

6.2 Mid-Decade Goals for health (MUG)

6.3 Retained National DOH programs (Malaria, Schistosomiasis, etc.)

6.4 Local Implementation of Foreign Assisted Programs (Philippine Health Development Program (PHDP), Urban Health and Nutrition Project (UHNP), Women's Health and Safe Motherhood (WHSM), Integrated Community Health Services (ICHS), LGU Performance Program (LPP), etc.

6.5 Doctors to the Barrios Program

6.6 Stop Death Program

6.7 Other programs as directed by the Secretary of Health;


7. Advise the LGU through the LHB on LGU compliance with the following mandatory actions under the Local Government Code (LGC):

7.1 Annual local health budgets;

7.2 Creation of committees under the LHB on:

health personnel selection and promotion,
bids and awards,
grievance and complaints,
personnel discipline,
budget and health program review, operations review;

a specific ofﬁce for the PHT shall be provided by the Provincial Health Office. (Such space can be negotiated for with the province concerned and included in the next round of CHCA negotiations, or DOH facilities in the province can be utilized when applicable, or as a last resort, rental of space should be provided for by the DIRFO.) Adequate administrative support in terms of personnel and equipment should also be provided.

The PHT should be given full recognition in the delivery of resources for LGUs in compliance with the CHCA or other DOH commitments to LGUs. Therefore, a representative of the PHT should be assured in the negotiation, coordination and actual turnover of such commitments to the LGUs in his/her area of responsibility.

Annual reports on support for DOH representatives should be part of LGAMS or DIRFO submissions to the Secretary of Health in the area of "Local Government Assistance." Funds for these activities should be provided by DIRFOs and subject to augmentation by LGAMS.

All DOH bureaus, services, units, DIRFO divisions/sections and all concerned attached agencies are hereby directed to cooperate in the effective implementation of the provisions, programs and the activities relative to this Order.

Any administrative issuance in conflict with this Administrative Order is hereby revoked, rescinded and declared ineffective.

This Order shall take effect immediately.



</body> 
<sign>MANUEL G. ROXAS, M.D., M.P.H.</sign>
<signtitle>(Undersecretary and Chief of Staff)</signtitle>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>


rcf\dohrep\qrs
