Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>02/27/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 6-A s. 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A MODIFIED SCHISTOSOMIASIS CONTROL STRATEGY</subject>

<body>

The termination of contractuals under the World Bank-assisted Philippine Health Development Project (PHDH) has brought about inadequacy of manpower to cover one hundred percent (100%) of the eligible population in schistosomiasis endemic areas. In view of this, a modiﬁed schistosomiasis control strategy has been developed to sustain the gains made in the control program. 

In order to maintain the present schistosomiasis low risk level and possibly bring down further the prevalence to a point where it will no longer pose a threat to public health, the modiﬁed control strategy will be implemented in all schistosomiasis endemic areas. Regional and Provincial Schistosomiasis Program Coordinators and Schistosomiasis Control Teams shall coordinate with each other in planning and executing the activities on the modified stategies for the attainment of the schistosomiasis control program objectives.


A. STRATEGIES/ACTIVITIES:


1. Case finding and treatment - 

1.1 School children from Grades I to VI in schistosomiasis endemic barangays will be examined by the Schistosomiasis Control Teams (SCT), to serve as indicator for intervention. Those found positive will be treated.

1.2 Prevalence of 10% and above in school children will indicate that mass treatment (treatment without the beneﬁt of stool examination) in that particular community should be carried out among individuals six (6) years old and above. Those below six (6) years old can submit stools for examination to SCT before treatment can be administered.

1.3 In areas where prevalence in school children is below 10%, passive case ﬁnding and treatment thru stool examination of walk-in patients will be undertaken at the SCT laboratories/ofices and Rural Health Centers. Kato Katz Kits and Treatment Kits will be provided at designated areas 


2. Snail Control and Environmental Modiﬁcations-

2.1 Partnership initiatives will be established with the Environmental Health Service of the Department of Health, Department of Public Works and Highways, National irrigation Administration, the community and other stakeholders for snail control and environmental modiﬁcation activities particularly infrastructure projects such as provision of sanitary toilets and safe water supply, construction of of drainage systems and footbridges, and other related schistosomiasis control projects.

2.2 Application of molluscicides will be done by the SCT once a snail area has been cleared.


3 Social Mobilization

3.1 To generate support and encourage collaborative efforts in the control of schistosomiasis, intra and inter sectoral coordination Will be conducted thru meetings/consultations with DOH program managers; local government ofﬁcials; teachers and school officials; various social political and business groups; and other government and non—government organizations.

3.2 Barangay assemblies and inter personal communications will be carried out for social preparation and information dissemination.

3.3 Conferences/workshops and skills development trainings for schistosomiasis service providers will be undertaken.

3.4 Adequate IEC materials will be provided and distributed to target public.

3.5 Communication campaign activities shall be coordinated with the Public Information and Health Education Service of the Department of Health.


4. Schistosomiasis Eradication in Bohol-

4.1 Mass stool examination of the eligible population to ﬁnd out whether there will be resurgence of the disease.

4.2 Surveillance of snail colonies to determine possible repopulation of the snail host (o. guadrasi).



B. GUIDELINES IN THE TREATMENT OF CASES:

1. Praziquantel (generic name) is the drug to be used either for selective or mass treatment which will be given at 40-50 mg/kg body weight in 2 divided dosage at 3-4 hours interval.

2. The drug should be taken with filled stomach or after ingestion of food. To avoid slightly bitter taste it can be taken With some ﬂuid and should not be chewed. Praziquantel tablets should be kept in well closed container protected from light.

3. Individuals with very poor general condition should simultaneously be given supportive drugs such as vitamins and hematinics. Likewise, anti-reaction drugs should be readily available during treatment.

4. Although praziquantel has not shown to be mutagenic, teratogenic or embryo-toxic, administration of drug is not recommended for pregnant women unless immediate intervention is essential. It is also advised that patients with history of epileptic seizure with high blood pressure as well as those with enlarged spleen or in the advance stage be treated in the hospital. Nursing mothers on the other hand, should not breastfeed their babies for 48 hours after praziquantel therapy.

5. Properly trained technologist, malacologists, midwives and other health workers maybe allowed to administer treatment provided they are under the supervision of a physician.

6. Rural Health Physicians should be encouraged in the administration of treatment. Rural Health Units should be provided with medical kits containing praziquantel and anti-reaction drugs.

7. Scheduling of treatment can be done in schools, health centres, barangay halls, and in their respective houses or any convenient designated area.



C. REPORTING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION

1. Periodic AccoMplishment Reports, (Monthly, Quarterly, Semi—Annual and Annual), shall be submitted by the Schistosomiasis Control Teams to their respective Regional Health Offices, copy furnished the Provincial Health Offices and Rural Health Units concerned, and the Schistosomiasis Control Service (SCS) at the DOH Central Ofﬁce.

2. Stall from the SCS and the Regional Schistosomiasis Program Coordinators shall conduct periodic monitoring and evaluation of the Modiﬁed Schistosomiasis Control Strategy, to assess the progress of its implementation.

This order takes effect immediately upon approval. 

</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO JR., MD, MHA</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


/SCS