Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>02/13/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 3 s., 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Installation and Operation of Think Box and Bulletin Board</subject>

<body>

I. OBJECTIVES Think boxes and a Bulletin Board will be installed at the DOH Central Office Compound:

1. To further generate interest and concern among the general public and the DOH employees, in the Department‘s activities or issues affecting it; 

2. To provide an additional mechanism for DOH employees to voice out their comments, observations, complaints, recommendations and suggestions on matters or issues affecting the department;

3. To provide additional means for DOH management to address or respond to complains, provide feedback on issues and knowledge commendable actions or activities of persons, groups or offices;

4. To provide means for the general public i.e. DOH visitors and DOH employees to get general information about the DOH’s on-going activities and indicative calendar of events for a week/month;

5. To provide a means of conveying key information and health education messages to the general public.



II. GUIDELINES


A. Think Box


1. Eight think boxes will be installed at the following sites: a) Bldg 1 Office of the Secretary, b) Bldg 3 Office of the Chief of Staff, c) Bldg 2 Office for Management Service, d) Bldg 4 Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulations, e) Bldg 13 Office for Public Health Services, f) the two (2) DOH guardhouses located at the Rizal Avenue gate at the Tayuman gate (near the Crematorium), and g) the Convention Center.


2. All comments and suggestions from DOH employees and other interested parties are welcome.


3. A standard comments form will be made available near the boxes. However, the sender may use other forms as long as the following data are available: date, comment and suggestion, name of sender, office.


4. A “Bright idea of the Month“ will be selected among all the comments and suggestions submitted. The sender of the selected "Bright Idea of the Month“ will be duly acknowledged and commanded.


5. All submitted comments and suggestions become a property of DOH  management, and as such the management shall deal with them as it seems best fit.


6. The HEALTH POLICY DEVELOPMENT STAFF (HPDS) is tasked with the following functions: 

6.1 Open all boxes add collect all contents every Friday, 10:00 A.M.

6.2 Systematically document and file all forms/letters submitted.

6.3 Prepare a summary of the comments and suggestions which will be submitted to the Office of the Secretary and Office of the Chief of Staff no later than 9:00 A.M. the following Monday.

6.4 Provide all other USECs a copy of the pertinent letters or accomplished comments and suggestions form with an action slip concerning their Office for proper action and feedback as has been decided by Office of the Secretary or the Office of the Chief of Staff.

6.5 Monitor all actions and make a bi-monthly report to the Undersecretary and Chief of Staff who shall in turn report to the Secretary.

6.6 Coordinate with the concerned office the preparation of the appropriate administrative issuance, if such action is required as a result of the comment and suggestion.

6.7 Assist the Chief of Staff in the selection of a “Bright Idea of the Month”.

6.8 Refer to the Office of the USECs all commendable observations, comments and suggestions which aided policy making and the selected “Bright idea of the Month”, for posting on their bulletin boards for a month.

6.9 Maintain an ample supply of blank forms in each THINK BOX.


7. The think boxes will be installed and kept secure in their original location by the GENERAL SERVICES DIVISION, ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE.


B. BULLETIN BOARD

1. The BULLETIN BOARD will be installed in a strategic location at the entrance to the DOH Compound.

2. All Offices of the Undersecretary shall:

2.1 Submit to the Office of the Chief of Staff, Attn: PIHES all information and messages for announcement via the bulletin board ex: Congressional hearings, health program events, job vacancies, key health messages for the week/month, seminars, trainings, biddings, etc. two weeks before posing time.

2.2 Update or inform PIHES of any revisions or changes in the messages one week before posting time.


3. The PUBLIC INFORMATION AND HEALTH EDUCATION SERVICE (PIHES) is tasked with the following functions:

3.1 Assign a focus person and an alternate who will act as coordinator;

3.2 Prepare and/or gather from the Offices of the Undersecretary the key information and health education messages to be posted on the bulletin board.

3.3 Confirm/verify with the Offices of the UnderSecretary a week before posting date the information and key health messages to be posted.

3.4 Be responsible for the day-to-day maintenance, repair, and security of the bulletin board.

Any Administrative issuance in conflict with this Order is hereby revoked, rescinded and declared ineffective immediately.


</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO JR., MD, MHA</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
