Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>02/05/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2-B s. 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Rationale, Objectives, Functions, and Composition of the Technical Committee, Technical Working Groups, and Secretariat organized to implement the DOH—Asian Development Bank Project to undertake a Sector Review on the Health of the Working-Age Population (Adult Health Project).</subject>

<body>

Rationale:

The pattern of disease is changing rapidly in the Philippines, which will affect the quality of life and productivity of working people. As national investment programs are emerging to sustain maternal and child health fresh attention is needed to address the shifting burden of disease on the working—age population.

Disease that shorten the life of adults and reduce the productivity of workers may be either communicable or non-communicable. There is, however, a rising trend in accidents and non—communicable diseases particularly cancer and diseases of the heart and the cardiovascular system which are chronic in nature, are more expensive to manage, and require greater time and resource commitments from health facilities and personnel.

Five  of the ten leading causes of morbidity in 1990 affect primarily adults: TB accidents, diseases of the heart, malaria and malignancy. Among the ten leading causes of mortality in 1990, diseases of the heart and those of the vascular system ranked first and third, followed by TB, malignancy and accidents. TB is endemic throughout the Philippines, while malaria and schistosomiasis remain serious problems in certain regions, with high morbidity lowering worker productivity.

It is anticipated that the rising trends in adult disease incidence, the increasing demand for services and the higher cost of diagnosing and treating chronic illness will put severe pressure on the capacity of central and local government units to provide care, especially to the poor. The financing of public health services will become increasingly difficult to sustain and it is likely that demand for services and increasing costs will strain existing sources of finance over the long term unless sustainable mechanism are put into place.

In view of the foregoing, the Department of Health, in collaboration with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) is undertaking a sector review of the health of the working—age population. Such a review will produce a framework for future investments and projects towards sustaining the health of the working-age population. 


Sector Review Objectives:

1. Provide a health situation analysis of the working—age population in the Philippines, emphasizing the worst-off groups and regions requiring priority attention from public services;

2. Analyze the impact of the shifting disease burden from infectious to chronic and degenerative diseases in an aging population on health services delivery, health management, andthe affordability of health care;

3. Review government policies, goals, and intervention programs and suggest ways of strengthening preventive and promotive care for adults;

4. Refine further the DOH’s management strategy in support of a shift from services provider to regulator, intersectoral coordinator of adult health planning, and quality control manager for devolved health programs serving adults;

5. Examine the challenges of health service integration under devolution; particularly in public hospitals and rural health units and recommend a strategy for integration of management and; budgeting for adult health services by LGUs; and

6. Develop a medium term investment plan for adult health services based on unit cost analysis, public expenditure reviews, and clearly delineated financing roles for the Government and LGUs, the private sector and external agencies.


Project Implementation:

Adult Health Technical Committee. The DOH will manage and oversee the conduct Of this activity through an Adult Health Technical Committee (AHTC) which will be organized for this, purpose. The ADB, on the other hand will provide the funds to procure the needed foreign and local consultancy services. Principal investigators for this project are Asec. Manuel M. Dayrit of DOH and Mr. Joseph M. Hunt of ADB. Dr. Dayrit and Mr. Hunt will co-author the final report.

Technical Working Groups. Six technical working groups (TWGs) composed of selected DOH staff will be organized. The TWGs will be organized for each of the following technical areas: communicable diseases, non—communicable diseases, occupational and environmental health, community participation/devolution, health care financing, MIS/Disease Surveillance. These TWGs will work under the supervision of the Technical Committee. Each TWG will have a designated Leader who will report to the Chairman of the AHTC.


Composition and Functions of the Adult Health Technical Committee:

In view of the foregoing, the folloWing will compose the AHTC:

Chairperson: 	Asec. Manuel M. Dayrit
Vice-Chair: 	Asec Antonio Lopez, OPHS

Members:	Asec Ma. Margarita Galon, OHFSR
		Dir. Teresita Bonoan, CHS
		Dir. Virgilio Gonzales, SLH
		Dir. Zenaida Ludovice, IPS
		Dir. Remigio Olveda, RITM
		Dir. Melahi Pons, MAS 
		Dr. Consorcia Lim-Quizon, PHO, Tarlac

Advisers:	Mr. Joseph M. Hunt, ADB
		Dr. Rosendo R. Capul, DOH/TASU


The functions of the AHTC are as follows:

1. Manage and oversee the conduct oI the adult health sector review.
2. Provide the policy direction for the sector work.
3. Provide technical supervision and oversee the work of the six TWGs.
4. Assess periodically the pace and quality of the sector work as it progresses.
5. Review and approve the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the sector report.

The Chairman of the AHTC will report to the following: 1) the Undersecretary of the Office of Public Health Services under whose office technical oversight and support will be provided for the project; 2) the Undersecretary and Chief of Staff under whose office investment planning for DOH programs is Undertaken.


Composition and functions of the Technical Working Groups:

Communicable Diseases:	Dr Mariquita Mantala, TBCS (Leader)
			Dr. Eumelia salva, CDCS 
			Dr. Leonard Ortega, MCS
			Dr. Enrique Tayag, SLH

Non Communicable Diseases:	Dr. Marie Lou Monson, NCDCS (Leader)
				Dr. Ruth Surmieda, NCDCS 
				Dr. Juan Lopez, NCDCS 

Occupational Health/Env Hlth:	Dr. Christy Dablo, NCDCS (Leader)
				Dr. Mario Villaverde, EHS
				Dr. Lilibeth David, OPHS

Community Participation: 	Ms. Virginia Gaylan, CHS (Leader)
				Dr. Ma. Nemia Lapastora, FETP
				Ms. Lourdes Balce, LGAMS

Health Care Financing:		Ms. Maylene Meniado, MAS (Leader)
				Mr. Rolando Benitez, OMS
				Ms. Remedios Paulino, ENHR

MIS/Disease Surveillance:	Dr. Timoteo Badoy, FETP (Leader)
				Dr. Erlinda Guerrero, HIS
				Ms. Charity Tan, MAS


The functions of the TWGs are as follows:

1. Provide available data to consultants or direct them to sources of good quality data needed for the sector analysis.
2. Review the technical papers prepared by local consultants and assess the quality and adequacy of the collected data. 
3. Examine the validity of the conclusions that are being drawn by the consultants.
4. Assist in the formulation  of appropriate recommendations based on the findings and conclusions of the review.


Secretariat:

The Plans and Programs Division of the Internal Planning Service, which has been mandated under Department Circular No. 175—H issued on November 13,1995 to manage and oversee the process of implementing the DOH Ten-Year Investment Plan, will provide secretariat support for this activity


Composition and functions of the Secretariat:

The Secretariat will be composed of selected staff of the Plans and Programs Division of the Internal Planning Service and others who the Chairman of the AHTC may designate. The Secretariat will be headed by Dr. Juanito Taleon. 


The functions of the Secretariat are as follows:

1. Serve as repository of all data, records, and reports.
2. Provide technical inputs in the drafting of the adult health intervention plan.
3. Assist in organizing AHTC meetings: setting up the meeting venue; insure that discussion documents are prepared and distributed to committee members, and keep minutes of meetings.
4. Liaise with government oversight financing, and other offices, donor and other agencies that the DOH may have to work with or relate to in the conduct of the review. 
5. Assist in organizing to review the draft sector report, within or outside the DOH and in distributing copies of the draft report to parties concerned.


Implementation Timeline

The adult health sector review will be carried out in three phases over a period of nine months. During Phase I (mid-February to mid—March), a set of preliminary technical background studies will be prepared by local experts under the guidance of the AHTC. These studies will be reviewed and finalized by the TWGs and will be made available to the international consultants upon commencement of their work to minimize the need for data gathering. During Phase II (April 1 to May 30) the consultants, DOH and LGU counterpart staff will discuss national policies and programs, assess data needs, conduct field investigations and present preliminary findings in an interim report. In Phase III (June 1 to November 30) the consultants will prepare drafts of the sector
review for comments and review by the AHTC. Workshops will be convened after the first and second drafts are ready for public
review, in which leading experts in government industry, the academe, representatives of the League of Municipalities, selected NGOs and funding agencies will be invited to review the work in progress. The sector report will then be reviewed in public sessions by technical experts including those from the donor community before resubmitting the edited drafts to the AHTC andADB for finalization.

All above personnel are entitled to travelling expenses and
per diem chargeable against their respective sending agency. Workshop expenses, office space, communication expenses, IEC materials, and other incidental expenses will be chargeable against the approved funds of the Field Epidemiology Program funds subject to the usual accounting and auditing procedures of the Department.
 
 

</body> 
<sign>HILARION J. RAMIRO JR., MD, MHA</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
