Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>12/27/1996</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 43, s. 1996</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Distribution and Utilization of Portable Dental Chairs and Compact Portable Dental Units in 20 Priority Programs under the Poverty Alleviation Program of President Ramos</subject>

<body>

I. BACKGROUND/RATIONALE

In 1994, capItal/equipment outlay appropriation of the Dental Health Service, Department of Health was approved for the purchase of portable dental chairs and compact dental units among other office equipment. The said dental equipment and units are to be distributed to the 20 priority provinces under the Poverty Alleviation Program of President Ramos, if only to strengthen the implementation of the  dental health program and provide quality dental health care in the marginalized and underserved communities in selected areas. 

There is rarely functional dental equipment and units in the rural health units/hospitals throughout the regions. One major factor and constraint in the inefficient and ineffective, delivery of quality dental health care, is the  non—functional dental equipment or unit.


II. COVERAGE

In support of the Poverty Alleviation Program, the following twenty provinces shall be considered priority recipients of the portable dental chairs and compact portable dental units.


CAR

Abra
Apayao
Benguet
Ifugao
Kalinga
Mt. Province


REGION II

Batanes


REGION IV 

Aurora 
Romblon


REGION V

Masbate


REGION VI

Antique
Guimaras


REGION VIII

Biliran
Eastern Samar
Southern Leyte


CARAGA

Agusan del Sur
Surigao del Sur


ARMM

Tawi-Tawi
Sulu


III. ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF CONCERNED OFFICES/UNITS


3.1 DENTAL HEAETH SERVICE, DEPARTMENT 0F5HEAETH

1. Take charge of the distribution/shipment of portable dental chairs and compact portable dental units to the identified Regional Health Offices where the 20 priority provinces are located.

2. Receive reports from the province through its respective Regional Health Office as to the  compliance of the guidelines on:

a. Utilization of the dental equipment/units in the implementation of the dental health program.

b. Effectivity of the implementation of the program.

3. Submit reports to the Undersecretary for Public Health Service on related issues/constraints encountered during the implementation of the Program; and recommend policy actions for the Secretary of Health decision and approval.


3.2 REGIONAL HEALTH OFFICE THROUGH THE DENTIST IV

1. Receive end acknowledge the delivery of the said dental equipment.

2. Prepare and issue Memorandum Receipt (MR) to the Provincial Dental Supervisor or Dentist III.

3. Distribute the dental equipment/unit to the Dentist III in the identified province.

4. Monitor and oversee the compliance of the guidelines and the status of utilization of the dental equipment/units in respective provinces.


3.3 LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNIT

1. Allocate funds for the maintenance and repair of the dental equipment/units (Procurement of needed spare parts, accessories and payment for the repair)

2. Provide dental manpower to the pilot areas.


3.4 DENTIST III (PROVINCIAL DENTAL SUPERVISOR)

1. Responsible for the dental equipment/units which will be based and utilized in the municipalities by the Public Health Dentists.

2. Organize a team of dental personnel composed of public health dentists and dental aides.

3. Identify non—functional parts or accessories needing repair/replacement.

4. Supervise the dental team on the observance of a regular schedule of equipment maintenance care.


IV. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES


4.1 DISTRTBUTION/SHIPMENT

1. The shipment of the portable dental chairs and compact portable dental units shall be to the regional health offices. The Dentist IV, who is the head in the regional level for the Dental Health Service shall receive and acknowledge the  delivery of the said equipment.

2. The Dentist IV shall distribute the dental equipment/unit to the Provincial Dental Supervisor or Dentst III in the identified province under the Poverty Alleviation Program. A Memorandum Receipt (MIR) shall be issued to the Dentist III who will now be responsible for the dental equipment/unit which will be utilized in the municipalities by Public Health Dentists.


4.2 UTILIZATION

1. The portable dental chair and compact portable dental unit shall be used for the preventive and curative services among priority target groups who are the pregnant mothers and children (2-5, 6-12 years old).

2. Utilization of the portable dental equipment for civic and outreach mission shall not be the priority activity of dentists within the province. The said dental equipment/unit shall not be taken out from the assigned province which in not among the 20 priority provinces.


4.3 LOCATION/TYPE OF SERVICES

1. The said dental equipment and unit shall be based at the provincial health office with the Dentist III.

2. The Dentist III shall organize a team of public health dentists together with their respective dental aides. The team of dental personnel shall prov1de the pit and fissure sealant application and permanent fillings among the targetted children, oral prophylaxis and permanent fillings to the pregnant mothers. The approach of the dental team will be mobile or roving around the province.


4.4 FUNDING

Under the Provisions of the Comprehensive Health Care Agreement (CHCA) Local Government Executives shall allocate funds for:

a. maintenance and repair of the dental equipment/units.

b. procurement of needed spare parts and accessories.

c. operation of the said equipment/units.

d. Transportation and other incidental expenses to be incurred in the implementation of the program for the mobile/roving team.


4.5 MAINTENANCE

1. Dental equipment/units not functioning shall be restored to normal condition within a week.

Non—functioning equipment/units shall be reported in writing to the Office of the Governor through the Provincial Health Officer. Efforts shall be exerted to have the said equipment/units regained immediately.


4.6 REPORtING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION

1. The Regional Health Office through the Dentist IV shall submit periodic reports to the Dental Health Service, Department of Health on:

a. compliance ofthe guidelines such as funding, maintenance and repair. 

b. utilization and operation of the dental equipment/units.

c. effectiveness of the implementation of the dental health program through theutilization of the denta1 equipment/units.

2. The Dental Health Service shall evaluate on:

a. compliance of the guidelines

b. utilisation and operation of the dental equipment/units

c. effectiveness of the implementation of the dental programs through the utilization of dental equipment/units.

Any Administrative Issuance previously issued which is inconsistent with these guidelines is hereby revoked.

For strict compliance.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


v96/admport
