Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel. No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03 
Fax 743-18-29

<date>12/03/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 29-A s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Creation of the Food  and Waterborne Diseases Prevention and Control Program</subject>

<body>   

I. Rationale

Food and waterborne diseases (FWBD) are among the most common cause of diarrhea which remain one of the ten leading causes of morbidity and mortality in the country. Also, outbreaks from FWBD can be very massive and catastrophic. Since most of these diseases have no specific treatment modalities, the best approach to limit economic losses due to FWBD is prevention through health education and strict food and water sanitation. Thus, on April 23, 1997, the Department of Health - Executive Committee (DOH-EXECOM) unanimously approved the creation of the Food and Waterborne Diseases Prevention and Control Program (FWBDPCP) under the Communicable Disease Control Service.


II. Goal

The goal of the program is to reduce diarrheal morbidity from 1,997 to less than 1,000 cases/100,000 population and mortality rates from 6.7 to less than 3/100, 000 population by year 2003. 


III. Program Objectives

1. To formulate policies and guidelines for the prevention/control and case management of FWBD.
2. To devise strategies to disseminate appropriate information on the practice of good personal hygiene, safe food preparation, and environmental sanitation.
3. To establish FWBD surveillance system to guide program planning, decision making, and policy formulation.
4. To upgrade referral hospital laboratory capabilities on identification of etiologic agents of FWBD.
5. To coordinate/collaborate with the different DOH services and other government and non—government agencies in program implementation.


IV. Definition of Terms

Food and waterborne diseases (FWBD) - limited to group of illnesses characterized by diarrhea, nausea, vomiting with or without fever, abdominal pain, headache and/or body malaise. These are spread or acquired through the ingestion of food or water contaminated by disease causing microorganisms (bacterial or its toxins, parasitic, viral) and excludes FWBD caused by chemicals.

FWBD Surveillance System - a system that will provide a comprehensive epidemiologic information on current situation on FWBD in an area. This entails an ongoing, systematic collection, analysis, interpretation, and distribution of health data relevant for prevention and control of FWBD.


V. Program Components and Strategies

The program shall have the following components:

1. Information Dissemination which will focus on personal hygiene, safe food preparation, storage and handling, and environmental sanitation.
2. FWBD Surveillance System will be composed of community-based and laboratory—based surveillance. 
3. Clinical Care will focus on case management of FWBD with emphasis on ORESOL (ORT) and rational use of diagnostic tests for FWBD.
4. Training on local program implementation to include surveillance, outbreak investigation, case management, and laboratory skills.
5. Research/Special Studies related to FWBDS.
6. Monitoring and Evaluation to provide program direction.

The main undertaking of the program shall be health education and information dissemination, especially the World Health Organization (WHO) TEN GOLDEN RULES TO SAFE FOOD PREPARATION, SAFE WATER SOURCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL SANITATION.


VI. Organization, Policies and Procedures

The Communicable Disease Control Service (CDCS) shall be the lead agency involved in planning, formulating policies and guidelines, and training on program implementation of ﬁeld implementors for prevention and control of FWBD. The following services shall coordinate and collaborate with CDCS in implementing the FWBP Prevention Control Program:

1. Environmental Health Service (EHS): Collaborate with the local Government Units (LGUs) for proper and strict enforcement of the Sanitation Code of the Philippines for prevention and control of food and waterborne diseases.
2. Maternal and Child Health Service (MCHS): Provide policies and guidelines in the control of diarrheal diseases (CDD) in children 5 years and below particularly in case management.
Creation of the Food  and Waterborne Diseases Prevention and Control Program. Health Intelligence Service (HIS): Provide/furnish morbidity and mortality data from ﬁeld health units on important FWBD particularly Cholera, Typhoid Fever, Hepatitis A, Salmonellosis, Shigellosis, and Food Poisoning.
4. Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP): Investigate FWBD outbreaks nationwide and provide training on epidemic preparedness, response, writing and communicating reports.
5. Public Information Health Education Service (PIHES): Conduct health education and information dissemination activities and production, reproduction and distribution of IEC materials on FWBD.
6. Bureau of Research and Laboratories (BRL): Conduct culture and sensitivity studies during FWBD outbreak investigations, researches on FWBD anti—microbial resistance surveillance in collaboration with RITM, and food and water sample analysis skills training for laboratory personnel.
7. Hospital Operations Management Service (HOMS): Establish a hopital— based surveillance network for FWBD etiology and anti—microbial sensitivity.
8. Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM): Conduct researches on FWBD, anti—microbial resistance surveillance for the important FWBD etiologic agents, and skills training for laboratory personnel in collaboration with BRL.
9. Health Manpower Development and Training Service (HMDTS):- Support and help manage in the conduct of trainings.
10. Local Government and Monitoring Service (LGAMS): - Coordinate with the LGUs through the Local Health Board to assist in the passage of local ordinances in enforcement of law on food safety and sanitation especially on street food vendors.
11. Regional Health Offices (RHOs): All RHOs shall designate a FWBDPCP coordinator who shall be responsible for implementing the plans and activities of the FWBDPCP as a national program in close coordination with LGUs. As such shall appropriate contingency fund in the amount of fifty thousand pesos (P50,000.00) from the general funds of the region which shall be made available for program implementation beginning 1998. All FWBD outbreaks shall be investigated and continued by the Regional Epidemiology and Surveillance Unit (RESUs) in collaboration with the LGUs.


VII Effectivity

This order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 

