Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>04/07/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 6-A s., 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines on the Utilization of Schistosomiasis Control Service GOP Training Funds for the Conduct of National Consultative-Conference Workshop on Program Strengthening and Planning for Schistosomiasis Control</subject>

<body>

There will be a National Consultative-Conference Workshop on Program Strengthening and Planning for Schistosomiasis Control Program for Field Program Managers and Implementors in Baguio City from May 28-31, 1997. The discussions will be centered on the following: 1. Program review including identification of issues/challenges that have affected program implementation from January to April 1997; 2. discussion/analysis and workshop on Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) in the implementation of Schistosomiasis Control Program; 3. discussion and development of strategies to effectively carry out health promotion and advocacy; 4. presentation of provincial accelerated plans for CY 1997; and 5. presentation and discussions/reactions on the Manual and Guidelines for Snail Control. This will also serve as venue for interactions/consultations among Field Managers on matters concerning program policies, strategies, and other issues of national importance.


A. Guidelines on the Conduct of Consultative Conference-Workshop

1. The participants to this 4-day live-in Conference-Workshop shall be composed of the Technical Division, the Regional and Provincial Schistosomiasis Coordinators of DOH Regional Field Office Nos. IV, V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, ARMM and CARAGA, facilitators from Schistosomiasis Control Service (SCS) and Schistosomiasis Research and Training Division (SRTD) and representative from Public Information and Health Education Service. Please refer to attached syllabus.

2. Resource Speakers may be invited from institutions such as the Development Academy of the Philippines (DAP), the University of the Philippines (UP) and from other creditable training institutions.

3. Representatives from other government and non-government agencies involved in the control of schistosomiasis may also be invited to participate in this Consultative-Conference Workshop depending on the availability of funds.

4. Staff coming from the Schistosomiasis Control Service (SCS), Manila, Schistosomiasis Research and Training Division (SRTD) in Palo, Leyte, shall constitute the Resource Persons and Facilitators for this Conference Workshop.

5. The Director of the Schistosomiasis Control Service shall designate the Training coordinator with the assistance of the Training Committee members to take charge of the said Conference Workshop activities.

6. The Training Committee with the guidance of the Director of schistosomiasis Control Service shall do all the planning, scheduling and execution of the Conference Workshop. They shall also take charge of the conference proceedings and reports after the training.


B. Guidelines on Utilization of Training-Workshop Funds

1. The funds for the Conference Workshop shall cover expenses for food and lodging (to be contracted out), supplies and materials, honorarium for the invited Resource Speakers, conference hall, gasoline expenses, and rental for the use of audio-visual equipment.

2. Computation of the estimated budget cost for the Schistosomiasis Conference Workshop shall be based on the number of participants including facilitators and resource persons multiplied the number of Workshop days, multiplied by Five Hundred Forty Pesos (P540.00) or (70 Pax x 4 days x P540.00 = 151,200.00). Refer to the Breakdown Cost found in the Syllabus hereto attached.

3. If in case there are invited resource speakers from other institutions/agencies outside of the Department of Health, they are entitled to receive honorarium of Five Hundred Pesos (P500.00)/hour, the current rate for resource persons/speakers invited by the DOH, exclusive of his or her transportation expenses from the point of origin to the training venue and back, payment of which shall be borne out of the training funds coming from Schistosomiasis Control Service.

4. The transportation expenses and per diems of one day before and one day after the four day Conference Workshop of those facilitators coming from Schistosomiasis Research and Training Division (SRTD) in Palo, Leyte, and from DOH Regional Field Offices concerned shall be financed by their respective sending agencies based on E.O. No. 248 dated May 29, 1995. Likewise, transportation expenses and per diems of one day before and one after the conference workshop of those representatives coming from other government and non-government agencies/offices involved in schistosomiasis control who may be invited to participate in the Conference Workshop shall also be financed by their respective sending agencies. 

5. Utilization of funds shall follow the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

6. In the event that part/portion of the Conference Workshop funds shall not be utilized after the workshop, the unused amount shall be programmed for schistosomiasis similar activity before the end of CY 1997.

For strict compliance.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, M.D., M.P.H., CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


Schistosomiasis Control Service, OPHS