Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>11/17/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 28-A s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Processing, Implementation, and Monitoring of Congressional Initiatives (CIs)</subject>

<body>

I. Purposes 

1. To establish streamlined procedures, minimum requirements and clarify responsibilities of the Department of Health (DOH) Offices, Services, Divisions, Sections/Units involved in the implementation of Congressional Initiatives (Cls). 

2. To comply with the existing government accounting and auditing rules and regulations. 

3. To implement minimum standards and regulations of the DOH and other relevant laws. 



II. Definition of Terms

The following terms are herein defined for purposes of this Administrative Order:

1. Accredited private entities - are Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and Peoples Organizations (POs) accepted by DOH to implement CIs after proper verification and validation of required documents.

2. Congressional Initiatives are priority projects identified by members of Congress, both from the House of Representatives and Senate, with funding chargeable against insertions to DOH budget initiated by the some members of Congress. These are also called ”CIs”, “Insertions”, “Congressional Initiative Allocations (CIAs)" or Legislator Initiated Projects (LIPs)”.

3. Certification — letter from the Chairman of the Appropriations Committee as indorsed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives or from the Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee as indorsed by the senate President, as the case may be, stating a specified amount which is included in the specific budget line item of the DOH Appropriations as Congressional Initiative for a specified project. This serves as project indorsement from Congress to DOH and/or Department of Budget and Management (DBM).

4. Equipment - refers to those items like furniture, fixtures, ambulances, other motor vehicles, medical/dental/hospital and other health- related equipment, and the cost of which shall be P10,000 and above per unit, whose serviceable life is more than one year and which add to assets of the government.

5. Field Projects — are projects with location of recipients/users identifiable or belong to a certain Regional Health Office (RHO) or Special Hospital for implementation. The term “field project” does not refer to CI project for DOH—Central Office (DOH-CO} health programs or CI project with national or multi-regional coverage.

6. Government Agencies — refer to all National Government Agencies (NGAs), Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs), Local Government Units (LGUs) and other government ‘ instrumentalities.

7. Proponent-Legislators - refer to project sponsors or initiators who are members of either the House of Representatives or Senate.

8. Philippine National Drug Formulary(PNDF) - refers to current edition of Essential Drugs List which also describes the appropriate use of listed drugs published by the National Drug Policy (NDP).

9. Recipients - are project beneficiaries or users which are mainly government health offices or facilities.

10. Special Hospitals — refer only to the retained hospitals and medical centers classified as such in the General Appropriations Act (GAA) which DOH—Central Office used to provide direct sub-allotments (i.e. sub-allotments not through the RHOs).

11. Sub-Allotment Advice - an authority issued by DOH—CO to RHO and Special Hospitals to incur obligations within a specified amount for a specified purpose(s).



III. Coverage

Projects covered by this Administrative Order are only CIs as defined above. CIs do not include projects under the Countrywide Development Fund (CDF) and other projects requested by members of Congress chargeable against the lump-sum funds of DOH regular projects and programs.



IV. General Guidelines

1. CIs are priority projects which shall be processed/implemented by  DOH on a fast—track manner.

2. CIs implementaion shall always adhere to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations as well as project implementation procedures. 

3. DOH shall ensure that CIs are consistent with its policies, standards, rules, regulations, and applicable legislations.

4. Optimum coordination with the proponent—legislators is encouraged to facilitate project implementation. However, preferences and/or instructions by proponent-legislators shall be favorably considered only to the extent allowed by the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations, DOH policies, standards and regulations, and this Administrative Order. 

5. All duly approved fund transfers, cash advances, and CIs with private entities as recipients (if there are any) are subject to a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) or similar document between RHOs/Special Hospitals concerned and recipient agencies/entities.



V. Specific Guidelines

1. Schedule of Processing CI Funding Request

Qualified CI funding requests will be processed and indorsed to DBM anytime between January to December every year, except CI intended for Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) where processing of funding requests/indorsements to DBM will be only up to end of November every year.

2. Required Supporting Documents before DOH recommendation / indorsement to the DBM 

A. Letter request of CI Proponent-Legislator and certification from the House of Representatives or Senate, as the case may be.

B. Requirements for Equipment, Vehicles and Ambulances:

1) Accomplished Form I (see ANNEX “A”) prepared for the purpose containing the following:
a) List of equipment items
b) Technical Specifications (no brand name), quantity, estimated unit cost, and recipient (user) government health facility for each equipment item

2) Clearance/Authority to purchase from the National Telecommunication Commission (NTC) - for communication equipment request (if there is any)

C. Requirements for construction projects, repair / improvement and rehabilitation of building:

1) Work Program 
2) Cost Estimates
3) Narrative Justification



3. Processing and Responsible Units

CI implementation process shall follow the stages and activities with responsible units within the DOH as indicated in ANNEX “B”.



4. Execution of Approved CIs 

A. All field projects (including purchase of drugs and medicines, equipment, and constructions and construction-related projects)  shall be implemented through RHOs and Special Hospitals, as the case may be, except, purchases of ambulances and all types of motor vehicles including mobile clinics which shall be done by DOH-CO to be able to avail the services of Procurement Service(PS)—DBM. Sub-allotment advices will be used for this purpose indicating (among others) the name(s) of the proponent-legislator(s) who initiated the CI projects.

B. DOH—CO may avail the services of the PS-DBM in the purchase of ambulances and all types of motor vehicles including mobile clinics and some equipment provided the following conditions are present:

1) The following individual project documents, among others, are secured lay the Procurement and Logistics Service (PLS) and in turn shall be submitted to DOH-Budget Division within a given period:
a) Delivery Receipts - within 30 days after delivery date
b) Certificate of Fund Balance by Agency Procurement Request (APR) / Check No.— 30 days after payment date by PS—DBM

2) Acceptance and actual delivery to users/recipients are performed by PLS subject to prior inspection by the appropriate  DOH Committee on Inspection.

C. Drugs and medicines that can be purchased out of CI funds are only essential drugs found in the PNDF per Executive Order No. 49 dated January 21, 1993. Preferred list (including quantity and specification) of drugs and medicines (if there is any) must be secured first by DOH implementing/procurement units concerned (e.g, RHOs, Special Hospitals, and PLS) from the proponent- legislators concerned to start the purchase of drugs and medicines but only those found in the PNDF In generic specifications will be considered favorably.

D. Fund transfers (if there are any) to other government agencies shall be subject to the approval of the Office of the President (OP). Fund assistance (200-10) to private entities as recipients shall be treated as cash advance. These fund transfers and/or cash advances shall be subject to a MOA or similar document between RHOs/Special Hospitals concerned and recipient units. This MOA shall contain, among others, clear provisions/statements on the following requirements: 

1) Accountability of funds and project (e.g. liquidation reports, periodic project implementation status reports)
2) Project turnover, maintenance and management

E. Public bidding shall always be the primary mode of procurement for CIs. Other modes of procurement will be considered only when there has been failure of public bidding for the second time and the alternative method of procurement is allowed under Executive Order No. 302 dated February 19, 1996 and following the DOH  Modified Procurement System under Administrative Order No. 35  s. 1996, as enhanced under A.O. No. 14—B s. l997 in the case of  DOH—CO procurement and A.O. No. 29 s. 1996 for retained  hospitals.

F. Utilization of savings is always subject to DBM requirements and approval (e.g. submission of Certificate of Fund Balance or Certification of Availability of Funds and requirements in V.2 of this A.O. except certification from the House of Representatives or Senate).

G. CIs with private entities as recipients are considered donations in good faith subject to repossession by DOH if used for the purpose(s) other than for which it is originally intended.

H. Financial and medical assistance to indigent patients shall be provided only through government hospitals and medical centers. There shall be no cash assistance to indigent patients.



5. Modiﬁcation and Realignment

A. Modification and realignment of approved CIs (i.e with SARO) are subject to DBM approval. 

B. DOH indorsement to DBM for modification/realignment shall be made only upon satisfaction/compliance of the following:

1) Modification/realignment is requested/concurred/indorsed by proponent—legislator within 30 days after receipt of SARO by DOH
2) Released allotment is still available for modification/realignment 
3) Bid documents (or similar procurement documents) not yet released/issued to suppliers
4) Applicable required supporting documents in V.2.B and C of this A.O. (see page 4) are submitted to DOH—Budget Division.

C. Realignment/relocation of construction outlay shall only be made once.



6. Monitoring and Reporting

A. A Project Monitoring Group shall be established at the DOH-Budget Division with representative member from each unit involved in CIs  implementation

B. Finance Officer in each RHO and Special Hospital with CI shall function as CI Monitor and Contact Person of DOH-CO Project Monitoring Group. During the absence of the Finance Officer, a Budget Officer shall automatically assume CI Monitor and Contact Person of DOH-CO Project Monitoring Group.

C. All implementing units are required to submit semi-annual and annual status reports, and other reports as required by the Office of Management Service (OMS) or by the Secretary of Health.

D. The Project Monitoring Group at DOH-Budget Division shall be responsible for the preparation and submission of semi-annual and  annual reports on CIs or as required by DOH management and operation of liaison network for CIs. An annual consultative meeting shall be undertaken together with representatives from the Appropriations Committee, Senate Finance Committee and DBM.

E. DLLO has to assist Cl monitoring, provide effective liaison between DOH and the members of the Congress in relation to Cl projects. It shall also take charge of the coordination and follow-ups of super urgent requests from members of Congress.

F. A computer network and document tracking computer programs shall be established by the Management Advisory Service for the use of CI Project Monitoring Group.



VI. Effectivity

This Administrative Order shall take effect on December 1, 1997.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
 

fn/CIguide