Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila


San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-80-80  

<date>03/18/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 3-A s., 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Operation of the DOH-Radio Communication Network System</subject>

<body>

I. PURPOSE

This order is issued to prescribe the general guidelines and related procedures for effective monitoring, coordination and response to emergencies and disasters of the DOH pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1566 issued in June 1978 otherwise known as "Strengthening the Philippine Disaster Control Capability and Establishing the National Program on Community Disaster Preparedness"


II. DEFINITION OF TERM:

Radio Communication Network System (Radionet) - refers to a combination of two or more transceivers arranged to communicate over a distance by converting sounds or signal into electromagnetic waves and radiating them through space; or simply a network that conveys the intelligence (message) by radio waves.


III. COVERAGE:

The following DOH Offices and hospitals are covered by the Radionet:
1. Office of the Secretary
2. Office of the Chief of Staff 
3. Office of Health Facilities, Standards and Regulations Service
4. Disaster Management Unit 
5. Jose Reyes Memorial and Medical Center
6. San Lazaro Hospital
7. Jose Fabella Memorial Hospital 
8. East Avenue Medical Center 
9. E. Rodriguez Memorial and Medical Center
10. Rizal Medical Center 
ll. Philippine Orthopedic Center
12. National Center for Mental Health 
13. Quirino Memorial Medical Center 
14. Tondo Medical Center
15. National Children's Hospital
16. Valenzuela General Hospital
17. Las Piñas District Hospital
18. Research Institute for Tropical Medicine

Recycle garbage. Save the? envzronmem‘!
  

IV. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES

A. Functions of the DOH Operation and Coordinating Center 

1. Maintains a 24-hour monitoring of health emergencies and disasters

2. Maintains a standby Disaster Assessment and Response Team (DART) together with the necessary logistics for rapid assessment and emergency assistance

3. Coordinates needed health assistance from offices within and outside the Department

4. Submits timely reports of emergencies and disasters to the Secretary of Health, members of the Executive Committee and other concerned officials offices

5. Coordinates regularly with Operation Centers of the National Disaster Coordinating Council (NDCC), Regional Health Offices, hospitals and other agencies regarding emergencies and disasters

6. Maintains a databank of all health related emergencies and disasters


B. Management of Radio Communication Network System

a. Issuance/Distribution of Radio Communication Units

1. The Central Base for the Radionet shall be stationed at the Disaster Management Unit (DMU) being the DOH Operation and Coordinating Center 

2. The Secretary of Health Undersecretaries and selected OHFSR staff shall be issued handheld radios

3. All fourteen (14) retained hospitals in the National Capital Region (NCR), excluding Specialty Hospitals, shall be provided a radio base to be stationed at the Emergency Room and a mobile radio for their respective ambulances (the STOP D.E.A.T.H ambulances if available).

4 A handheld radio shall be issued to the STOP D.E.A.T.H. Coordinator of each NCR retained hospital. 

5. Efforts shall be made to expand the network to all retained hospitals nationwide within a period of three (3) years.

b. Maintenance 

1. The radio communication units issued to the hospitals shall become the responsibility of the individual hospital. Annual registration, repair and maintenance shall be charged to their STOP D.E.A.T.H. funds. Maintenance of other units issued to individual persons,  however, shall be charged to their respective offices

2. Loss of the units shall be the accountability of the official/personnel who received said units as per Invoice Receipt.

c. Purchase of Additional Units

Purchase of additional units for Central Office staff shall be charged to Central STOP D.E.A.T.H. hands while for hospitals, it shall be charged to their individual funds (STOP D.E.A.T.H. sub-allotment)


C. Standard Operating Procedures:

1. All radio units (base and handheld) shall be kept open and manned 24 hours a day. Hospital radio bases should not be turned off without informing the Operation Center while handheld radios should not be turned off without notifying respective hospital bases. 

2. Radio checks shall be done by the Operation Center everyday at 8:00 A.M. and at 12 midnight. Hospital bases shall respond accordingly and one after the other.

3. Only official messages shall be communicated over the radio.

4. All health emergencies and disasters, including epidemics, shall be relayed immediately (anytime of the day) to the Operation Center for rapid reporting to the Secretary of Health, Undersecretaries and other concerned ofﬁcials/ofﬁces. Operation Center shall, likewise, alert concerned hospitals and offices for other emergencies and disasters monitored.

5. Request for emergency assistance like medical teams, ambulance service, logistics; etc. to be used for emergency or disaster operations and which are available within the STOP D.E.A.T.H. hospital network shall be coursed directly to the hospital concerned. Requests not within the capacity of the network to accommodate shall be relayed to the Operation Center for central coordination, response and reporting.

6. Messages should be short and specific.

a. Format for communicating an event (emergency or disaster)

EVENT - ex. ﬁre, explosion, mass accidents, riots, etc 
DATE and TIME of occurence 
SITE — give specific location
NO. of CASES and DEATHS
ACTIONS TAKEN - ex. sent medical team, admitted in the hospital, etc.
STATUS - controlled? uncontrolled? needs additional team?, etc. 
SOURCE of information

b. Format for communicating patient information

NAME, AGE and SEX
CHIEF COMPLAINT
STATUS - ex. conscious, unconscious, stable, serious, etc.
TREATMENT given
NEEDS - ex. immediate transfer/surgery, needs blood, etc.

7. To ensure confidentiality of messages, use designated call signs, ten (10) codes and standard phonetics.

8. Always observe courtesy in using the radios Do not interrupt an ongoing radio conversation. Use "break" to be given the floor to use the radionet and a double break ("break, break”) for emergency connection. Ongoing conversation should give way to a call of double break. Never show anger, impatience or excitement. Never use vulgar/ profane words.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

