Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>10/02/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 22-C, s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for program managers, DOH representatives to the LHB, budget officers, and supply officers on the preparation, monitoring, and reporting of the Comprehensive Health Care Agreement (CHCA)</subject>

<body>

I. Rationale

The Comprehensive Health Care Agreement, a package of vital health programs that are annually negotiated with Local Government Units, represents the Department of Health’s commitment for an improved and strengthened health service delivery under a decentralized system. 

Several consultative meetings with representatives from Local Government Units, regional health personnel, and DOH management have agreed on the need for mechanisms that shall strengthen implementation of CHCA as a DOH strategy for partnership. 

In this light, the following guidelines for the preparation, monitoring and reporting for the CHCA are hereby formulated.


II. General Guidelines

A. This Administrative Order shall cover all GOP and foreign-assisted projects and programs.

B. Resources shall include cash components (grants, augmentation, subsidies sub—allotments) and in-kind.


III. Specific Guidelines

A. Preparation of CHCAs

1. It shall be a policy of this Department that all resources whether In-Cash or In-Kind that are to be delivered to Local Government Units be considered part of the CHCA. These shall include GOP and foreign assisted projects, donations, loan proceeds, and other national—local transfers (e.g. magna carta, subsidies, augmentation grants, etc.)

All programs and services are therefore required to prepare their respective packages following existing guidelines for preparation (AO 31-B, s. 1996).

2. Resources are herein referred to as any of the following

a. Human resource (e.g. DTTB, UHNP, PAF)
b. Drugs and Medicines
c. Logistics support (e.g. forms, kits, vehicles)
d. Equipment and other supplies  (e.g. fax machines, copier)
e. Training (fellowships, scholarships)
f. IEC Materials
g. Technical Assistance —consultants from foreign funded projects
h. Fund transfers (e.g. augmentation, grants, subsidies)
i. Information technology (e.g. software installation, etc)
j. Civil works or non—infra (e.g. repair of hospitals, RHUs)

3. Preparation of CHCAs shall be undertaken in two stages:

a) The first stage starts when an indicative package shall be initially submitted to the Local Government Assistance and Monitoring Service (LGAMS) based on proposed succeeding year budgets. Submissions shall be made immediately after technical DBM budget hearings (usually April). This shall be composed of disaggregated packages per region with breakdowns by Province and City. All submitted packages shall be consolidated by LGAMS by province and by region.

This disaggregation shall become an essential part of the preparation and submission of the operational plan and budget proposal for the succeeding year to the LGUs by the DOH Regional Field Office. 

Regional Field Offices will prepare their own commitments with the Area-Based or Local Health Plans of LGUs as basis for negotiation.

b) The second stage commences upon the notice of an approved budget (usually January), when program managers shall then submit validated or readjusted packages to LGAMS for distribution to the Regional Field Offices concerned.

B. Implementation of CHCA

1. All offices/bureaus/services/programs/projects are required to provide  information to LGAMS Regional Field Coordinators on expected dates of releases of cash and non-cash resources per quarter.

2. All DOH/CHCA resources delivered to Regional Field Offices or LGUs should be properly labeled “DOH-CHCA”.

3. Likewise, all Memoranda of Agreements, Memoranda of Understanding or other documents signifying any kind of partnership or any DOH assistance to LGUs should bear the statement: “This forms part of the DOH— Comprehensive Health Care Agreement (DOH—CHCA) Package.

C. Monitoring

1. There shall be an operational monitoring system in the Central and Regional levels that shall provide information on the flow of resources from the DOH to Local Government Units. The lead office for setting up the monitoring system shall be LGAMS.

2. All Central and Regional Program Managers and other concerned personnel are directed to comply with guidelines on the operationalization of a monitoring system for the CHCA. 

3. Performance of LGUs on their CHCA commitments will be monitored through the FHSIS reports. 

D. Reporting

1. Offices concerned are hereby required to accomplish quarterly and annual reports on the following indicators:

a. Status of deliveries to RFOs and LGUs 
b. Program performance reports 

c. Programs that are covered by bilateral agreements with Local Government Units shall also be regarded as part of the CHCA and are thus required to provide information on deliveries of resources to LGAMS (through the provincial city and municipal DOH representatives)

2. LGAMS shall develop the reporting instruments and determine personnel who shall accomplish the reports. It shall also collate all reports from the responsible personnel and provide feedback to the MANCOM in the form of quarterly and annual reports. 


IV. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
