Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>08/04/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 14-C s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for Modiﬁcation and Realignment of Released Allotment for Central Office Services/Programs</subject>

<body>

I. Purpose

1. To prescribe the guidelines and procedures for modiﬁcation of released allotment particularly for MOOE, which will be the basis of offices/programs concerned in the preparation of their requests; 

2. To minimize the frequency of requests for modification of released allotment for accurate control of accounts. 


II. Legal Basis:

1. National Budget Circular No. 440 dated January 30, 1995 Adoption of the Simplified Fund system of the Government.

Section 7.2 of said circular authorized agency concerned to use savings through augmentation, in accordance with Section 15, 49, 50 and 52 of the General Provision of RA 7845 or pertinent provisions of the GAA of the succeeding year,  provided that this, are tuition/program/project, allotment class and total object of expenditures appearing in the GAA.

2. National Budget Circular No. 438 dated January 11, 1995-Prescribing the Guidelines on the Purchase Equipment.

Section 4.1 states that the approved Annual Procurement Plan may be modified as a result of agency reprioritization of each equipment requirement without prior approval by the DBM provided that the modification shall involve only those items not subject to prior clearance from competent authority. In the case of the equipment items subject to prior clearance by the competent authority, i.e., motor vehicle, computers, communications equipment, firearms, authority shall first be secured prior to modification.

3. National Budget Circular No. 445 dated December 15, 1995-Implementing Guidelines, Rules and Regulations in the Realignment, Relocation of Capital Outlays and Public Works Projects. 

Section 4.4 states that realignment/relocation of a particular project shall only be made once, subject to among others, the following conditions and limitations:

4.4.1 It shall be made forty—five (45) days after the receipt of the original allotment (General or Special Allotment Release Order-GARO/SARO) but not beyond the two-year validity period;

4.4.2 In cases where there is a duplication of projects and overlapping of funding source for the same project in the region/province/municipality the agency concerned can implement the realignment immediately without waiting for the forty-five (45) prescribed period.

4. General Appropriations Act, General Provisions


III. Definition of Terms: 

Modiﬁcation - Augmentation of existing allotment from one object class to another.

Realignment - Augmentation of released allotment from one allotment class to another through the use or savings or unexpended balance of appropriation/allotment.

Mandatory Expenses- - These are amounts released particularly for, but not limited to, gas, petroleum, oil and lubricants, as well as for water, illumination and power services, telephone and other communication services, rents retirement gratuity and terminal leave requirements. These shall be disbursed solely for such item of expenditures in accordance with the Work and Financial Plan as approved by the Secretary of Budget and Management.

Savings and Augmentation - Savings refer to portions or balances of any programmed appropriation free of any obligation or encumbrance still available after the satisfactory completion or unavoidable discontinuance or abandonment of the work, activity or purpose for which the appropriation is authorized, or arising from unpaid compensation and related costs pertaining to vacant positions and leaves of absence without pay.

Object Class - refers to classification of authorized expenditures of the national government categorized under the current operating expenditures and capital outlay. Each object class is assigned a code number e.g. 200-02 for Traveling Expenses, 200-07 for Supplies and Materials, for the use of all agencies for purposes of uniform recording and interpreting of financial transactions.

Allottment Class - refers to classrfication of current operating expenditures  and capital outlays. Such allotment class referred to here are Personal Services, Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses and Capital Outlay.


IV. General Guidelines:

A. For Personal Services:

1. As a General Rule, augmentation of Personal Services is prohibited provided however that such augmentation will be used solely for Salary Standardization and implementatton of Manna Carta benefits.

2. In the use of savings, priority shall be given to augmentation of the amounts set aside for compensation bonus, retirement gratuity, terminal leave and other personal benefits authorized by law and those expenditures items authorized in special provisions and other section of the general provision of the GAA.


B. For Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE):

1. Offices responsible for program and activities concerned may augment without clearance from Budget Division, Finance Service, an item of expenditure within MOOE, from savings and other items of MOOE provided that the amount does not exceed 1/3 of the original appropriated amount to be augmented pursuant to the General Provisions of GAA.

These modification shall be reported to Budget Division for proper recording and monitoring of allotment.

2. If the amount of the modification exceeds 1/3 of the original appropriated amount, the office responsible shall seek clearance from the Budget Division, Finance Service, which shall make the necessary recommendation for approval by the Secretary of Health.

3. Any savings realized from Mandatory Expenditures may be realigned only at the last quarter of the year and shall be referred to the  Finance Service for evaluation and submission to the DBM. The request  shall however be accompanied by a certification that funds for all mandatory expenses have been fully satisﬁed.

C. For Capital Outlay: 

A. For Equipment Outlay:

I. Modification in the list of equipment to be purchased may be allowed provided that the total amount shall not exceed the amount appropriated for the purpose. Provided further that the guidelines embodied in Section 3.2 or NBC No. 438  dated January 11, 1995, are strictly adhered. 

2. Items that are directly used in the substantive operations of the service or office shall be given topmost priority in the approval of the modiﬁed list of equipment.

3. The unreleased balance for equipment outlay may be realigned only from one program to another 3 programs/activity upon approval of the DBM.

B. For Construction Outlay.

1. Offices may request for realignment/relocation of projects to be implemented in cases of overlapping of funding source and similar cases subject to the approval of the DBM.

2. Request for realignment/relocation involving locally funded projects, foreign-assisted projects congressional initiatives, those with specific approval of the Office of the President and other centrally managed projects shall be  processed and evaluated by the DBM Central Office.

3. Request for realignment/relocation of a particular project shall only be made once, and shall be subject to the conditions and limitations set forth under Section 4.4 of NBC No. 445 dated December 15, 1995.


V. Specific Guidelines:

1. Offices under General Management and Supervision (A.I.a.1.a) shall not provide such expense classes communication services; and water/illumination/power services. A lump-Sum amount shall be provided for such items of expenditures.

2. The released allotment for retirement gratuity shall be used solely for its purpose.

3. Request for modiﬁcation under object class (200-04) Repair and Maintenance of Government Facilities received by the Budget Division shall be referred to the Director of Health Infrastructure Service for evaluation and recommendation.

4. Allotment per released SARO of Congressional Initiatives may be realigned only upon the recommendation of the concerned Congressmen and Senators. These shall be forwarded by the Budget Division to the Department of Budget andManagement for approval.


VI. Specific Instructions:

A. All request for modification of offices/programs under Central office shall be submitted to the Budget Division-Finance Service.

B. The first modification shall be submitted to the Finance Service not earlier than April 15 of the current year. Offices which have not submitted their requests on the said date may submit it not later than July 15, the second cut-off date. For the third request which may include mandatory expenses, this shall be submitted not earlier than October 1 but not later than October 31 of each year. The above-stated cut-off date for modiﬁcation will be strictly enforced The basis of said  modification shall always be the original breakdown of allotment per GARO.

C. Offices shall submit their request together with the following documents:

a. Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses

1. Revised Work Plan.
2. Justifications for each object of expenditures.
3. Recommendation from the concerned Undersecretaries/ Assistant secretaries
4. Statement of Balances of Allotment duly certified by the Chief Accountant.
5. Prescribed format for modification shown in Annex ”A".

b. Equipment Outlay
1. Budget Execution Form No. 203 showing among others the quantity, type, specification cost of equipment be procured and deployment.
2. Inventory list of existing equipment verified by the Auditor.
3. Certificate of availability of funds duly signed by the Chief Accountant; and 
4. Statement of Allotments Obligations and Balances.

D. Reporting Requirements / Accounting ProcedUres :

Offices concerned shall first furnish Budget Divisions, Finance Service a copy of the approved request for modification (for verification if indeed the request had been approved by the Secretary of Health The Budget Division shall furnish the Accounting Division a copy of said approval and shall then be recorded in the books of accounts as adjusted to reflect the said modification.

E. Responsibility of the Heads of Offices Concerned:

The heads of offices concerned shall responsible for monitoring their allotment balances after securing the Statement of Balances from the Chief Accountant with assurance that no overdraft will be incurred in any object class after reflecting the approved modification, in case or overdraft, previously approved modiﬁcations can not be made effective.

F. Saving Clause:

Cases not covered by the Order shall be referred to Office of Undersecretary for
Management Services for resolution.

G. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately;

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

fn; rev_ao.doc

 

 

 

