 
Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
FAX NO.: 743-1829
TRUNKLINE: 743-8301 TO 23
LOC. 1125 TO 1126
DIRECT LINE: 711-9502 / 03  

<date>03/31/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 4 s. 1997</docnum>

TO: ALL REGIONAL HEALTH DIRECTORS, PROVINCIAL CITY AND MUNICIPAL HEALTH OFFICERS AND ALL CONCERNED

<subject>SUBJECT: ADDENDUM TO THE IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES FOR THE KNOCK OUT POLIO CAMPAIGN (ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER NO. 5s.1996) "SPECIAL PROCEDURES IN HIGH RISK AREAS".</subject>

<body>

The attached document entitled “Special Procedures in High Risk Areas" is hereby incorporated as an addendum to the Implementing Guidelines for the Knock Out Polio campaign, AO No. 5s. 1996. All other stipulations stated in Administrative Order No. 5s. 1996 remain in effect. 


</body> 
<sign>MILAGROS L. FERNANDEZ, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

 
SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR KOP HIGH RISK BARANGAYS

To ensure that the target for KOP - that is, more than 80% OPV coverage of children less than 5 years old - is attained, the following shall be the procedures in selected “KOP high risk barangays”.

1. What are KOP high risk barangays?

KOP high risk barangays are those with any of the following characteristics:

* densely-populated, economically-depressed
* with significant numbers of transient or mobile residents
* with low or known immunization coverage
* with no specifically-assigned Barangay Health midwife
* with clusters of “polio-compatible” AFP cases identified in previous year

2. What are procedures should be followed in preparing and managing KOP in these barangays?

Step 1: Identify high risk barangays: Using a map of the municipality, identify barangays or groups of barangays which could be considered high risk on the basis of the indicators outlined above. These barangays will most likely include urban slum communities or far flung, difficult-to-reach tribal villages.

Step 2: Make a detailed map of the high risk barangay: Individual, detailed maps of the identified barangays should then be prepared. A hand-drawn map is acceptable. The map should show the major streets, landmarks, and houses or clusters of houses. This map will be used to show the location of immunization posts and the specific area assignment of the house-to-house mobile teams.

Step 3. Estimate the under-5 years old population: Based on the estimated population, the under-5 years old can be calculated for the selected area. This will be used to estimate the logistics, manpower, social mobilisation and other requirements for the area.

Step 4. Decide on the additional strategies that will be done for the barangay: In addition to the usual arrangements for NIDs, it is necessary to adopt strategies in high risk areas to reach all the children. These strategies could include any combination of the following:

* creation of additional immunization posts: for instance, instead of establishing one Patak Center for every 300 children, one can be established for every 200 children)
* organization of more mobile immunization teams to go house-to-house in the afternoon
* linkage with previously or inactively participating community groups: for instance, military detachments, rebel groups, religious or civic missions, NGOs like mountaineering clubs and mining or logging companies
* use of new social mobilisation techniques: for instance, one week intensive IEC campaigns before the KOP day, BHWs can do house-to-house visits to remind parents on the forthcoming activities; Barangay Captains and Councillors can call a community assembly to emphasize the importance of the KOP; mobile town-criers or loudspeakers can be used in the early morning hours of the KOP day
* inclusion of additional immunization activities: for instance, evening or week-end immunization sessions especially in urban areas; mobile immunization within the week or 2-3 days prior to KOP day or after KOP day
* in rural areas and areas with peace-and-order problems, special “cease-fire” agreements and “Immunization for peace” projects between military authorities and rebel troups may again be possible for the benefit of the targetted children

Step 5. Estimate additional resource and manpower needs: Estimates for the NID should already have been completed, but it is necessary to estimate additional requirements for high risk based on the additional strategies such as extra staff and volunteers for extra immunization posts and mobile teams, additional vaccine carriers or transport requirements, among others.

Step 6. Obtain extra funds and other resources if needed: Previously untapped community and local resources should be tapped for KOP high risk areas. Local government executives, civic organisations such as the Rotary Clubs and NGOs can be approached before the KOPs to obtain additional resources.

Step 7. Make a detailed, regularly updated immunization plan for each high risk barangay: Based on the map already prepared and the decisions made on the extra strategies above, make the detailed operational plan as follows:

* mark the locations of immunization posts on the map, along with the day, time, and person responsible
* mark the areas to be covered by mobile teams, along with the day, time, and person responsible
* draw up a detailed schedule of activities for the NID in the high risk barangays

Step 8. Plan and conduct additional training of health workers and volunteers: An additional half day of training will be necessary to ensure that health workers and volunteers in high risk areas understand clearly what their tasks are, who will cover which areas, and at what time, and other details of the operations.

Step 9. Schedule and conduct monitoring and supervision activities: Before and during the NIDs, the high risk barangays should be visited. Make sure that supervisors are assigned, visits are scheduled, and ensure that supervisors have checklists to assess preparation and conduct of the NIDs. (See Revised KOP Monitoring Form A)

3. Are there any other special strategies in KOP high risk barangays?

Yes. REACT, the official “quick count” communication arm for the KOP campaign, should be furnished immediately with reports not only about OPV coverage on the KOP day but also other important updates, problems, or constraints needing immediate attention. All regions should have their KOP Action Centers which can immediately respond to any problem. All reporting forms and flow of reporting are the same as in non-high risk areas.

Priority should also be given to high risk barangays in terms of deployment of vehicles, which will be provided by the representatives of the Pharmaceutical Health Care Association of the Philippines (PHAP).
 
