Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>11/04/1997</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 26 s. 1997</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Bed Subsidy Program for Private Hospitals</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE

The Bed Subsidy Program, initially conceptualized during the term of then Health Secretary Enrique Garcia, primarily aims to subsidize the cost of hospitalization of indigent patients in private hospitals. This is also in recognition of the fact that providing subsidy to private hospitals is lees costly than building new government hospitals. In support of the program, a budget line item allocating a specified amount has been incorporated in the annual appropriations for the Department of Health since 1980. 

Program implementation started in 1981 nuclei then Health Secretary Jesus Azurin. Guidelines were formulated to direct program implementation. This updated set of guidelines particularly on fund utilization is hereby issued for a more effective operation and more importantly, to ensure that allocation of subsidy shall be equitably distributed among regions nationwide.



II. GUIDELINES 


A. Hospital Facilities and Beds

1. Private hospitals shall be eligible for program subsidy only if the following requirements/criteria are met:

1.1. a general hospital, at least a 25-bed secondary level private hospital
1.2. located in an area where there is no adequate government hospital facilities (i.e. nearest government hospital is at least 20 kilometers away unless separated by a body of water or mountain terrain)

2. Primary level private hospitals in 4th to 6th class municipalities may also be eligible provided that these are capable of delivering the level of health care equivalent to that of secondary hospitals 

3. A fixed number of beds not exceeding ten (10) in each hospital shall be subsidized depending on the socio—economic condition, morbidity status and population size of the area


B. Patients and Entitlements

1. Only the following patients shall be subsidized under the program

1.1. indigent as certified by a municipal social worker and a barangay official or a civic leader
1.2. extremely in need of hospitalization as certified by a Municipal Health Officer or head of unit of the nearest health facility
1.3. suffering from acute, short-term diseases such as gastro-enteritis, respiratory, trauma or has to undergo minor surgery such as appendectomy/ caesarian section

2. Subsidy shall cover hospital accommodation for at most 7 days, medicines, routine laboratory examination and professional fees. This shall be equivalent to a subsidy  amounting to 150.00/bed per day 

3. The necessary treatment and management of the patient shall be determined by the  attending physician in the hospital

4. Patients who are covered by third party insurance shall not be eligible for subsidy



III. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISM

1. The Regional Health Offices through the Regional Health Directors are authorized to approve the participation of the private hospitals in the Bed Subsidy Program using the aforementioned criteria. 

2. The RHO shall submit at the start of each calendar year a list of participating private hospitals and their respective locations.

3. A contract or a memorandum of agreement shall be entered into between the RHO and the private hospital detailing administrative/fund arrangements. 

4. The RHO shall ensure that subsidy for private hospitals in the region shall not exceed the total appropriations released for the purpose. Further, it shall be responsible for preparing the report using a standard form reflecting the amount utilized for each subsidized hospital. 



IV. FUND DISBURSEMENT 

1. Program fund is released from the Department of Budget and Management upon request  of RHO. This may be in the form of lump sum based on the number of bed subsidies in the region. RHO shall in turn release funds to the private hospitals

2. Private hospitals shall submit monthly bills to the RHO for reimbursement subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations

3. In cases where advance arrangements are required by private hospitals, a portion of the total subsidy may be obligated to the hospital. If necessary, a portion of the total fund may be deposited with a recognized bank to expedite settlement of bills

Previous Orders related to Bed Subsidy Program and other issuances inconsistent with this Order are hereby rescinded. 

This Order takes effect upon approval.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>