Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>09/15/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 13-A s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8316 “An act upgrading the Cotabato Regional Hospital in Cotabato City into a medical center to be known as the  Cotabato Regional and Medical Center, and appropriating funds therefor.”</subject>

<body>

Pursuant to Republic Act No. 83116, which lapsed into law on 30 June 1997 in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution, the following Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted.


Section 1. Title

This shall be known as the implementing rules and regulations of Republic Act No. 3316- “An act upgrading the Cotabato Regional Hospital in Cotabato City into a medical center to be known as the Cotabato Regional and Medical Center, and appropriating funds therefor.”


Section 2. Purpose:

These Rules and Regulations are adopted prescribing the guidelines, procedures for the implementation of R.A. No. 8316 to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the objective thereof.


Section 3. Scope:

These rules shall apply to the Cotabato Regional Hospital in Cotabato City.


Section 4. Acronyms:

The following acronyms shall be used to the implementing rules and regulations
and/or accompanying annexes or documents. 

CO	-	Capital Outlay
DBM	-	Department of Budget and Management
DOH	-	Department of Health
FS	-	Finance Service, DOH
HMS 	-	Health Maintenance Service, DOH
HOMS	-	Hospital Operations and Management Service, DOH
INFRA	-	Health Infrastructure Service, DOH
MOOE	-	Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses
OHF	-	Office for Health Facilities, DOH
PS	-	Personal Services
RHO	-	Regional Health Office
RHS	-	Radiation Health Service, DOH


Section 5. Implementation Guidelines


A. Requirements:

1. The following requirements shall be submitted by the Cotabato Regional and Medical Center to the DOH-OHF through HOMS:

1.1 Current / Existing Plantilla Items;
1.2 Detailed inventory of the hospital’s existing/ functional equipment;
1.3 Hospital’s infrastructure plan and site for expansion; and
1.4 Hospital’s existing financial statements which include the PS, MOOE and CO.


B. Administrative Procedures:

1. On the basis of the DOH hospital standards, as provided by the HOMS, the Cotabato Regional and Medical Center shall prepare the proposed requirements for the upgrading of its staffing, equipment, non-infrastructure/ physical plant and MOOE.

2. The Cotabato Regional and Medical Center shall submit its prepared budgetary estimates for their upgrading to the HOMS for its evaluation.

3. The INFRA shall prepare the budgetary estimates for the infrastructure requirements of the Cotabato Regional and Medical Center and submit it to the HOMS within fifteen (15) days from receipt thereof. 

4. The HOMS shall consolidate all requirements and send a copy to the OHF for their coments and/or approval.

5. Any change/ revision in the budgetary requirement must follow steps 1 to 4.

6. Upon approval by OHF, the requirements in terms of PS, MOOE and CO, shall be sent to the FS for endorsement to the DBM and a copy furnished to HOMS for ﬁling. A copy shall also be sent to RHO concerned.

7. Upon approval by the DBM, the implementation of this Republic Act shall begin.


C. Implementing Mechanism:

1. The Chief of Hospital of the Cotabato Regional and Medical Center shall oversee the operations and management relative to the said hospital’s upgrading.

2. The Chief of Hospital shall ensure the inclusion of upgrading to the following
Implementing Committees:

2.1 Hospital- Pre-qualification, Bids and Awards Committee (PBAC) Functions:
a. Facilitate proper procedures relative to the bidding of the hospital’s infrastructure upgrading project, as consulted with INFRA, and the awarding of contracts; and
b. Submit reports and recommendations.

2.2 Committee on Recruitment, Appointment and Training of New Hospital Staff. 
Functions:
a. Arrange and facilitate the advertisement of new positions and vacancies;
b. Create a selection board which will facilitate the necessary interviews and grading evaluation;
c. Facilitate the appointment of new staff;
d. Implement the necessary orientation and training program; and
e. Submit recommendations, updates and reports on the appointment/ hiring of new employees.

2.3 Committee on the Procurement of Equipment, Furniture and Consumable Supplies
Functions:
a. Coordinate with and request the technical assistance and expertise of the HMS-DOH;
b. Facilitate bidding and awarding of contracts;
c. Facilitate inspection of equipment, etc.;
d. Oversee the installation of inspected equipment;
e. Provide/facilitate final acceptance,
f. Facilitate the inauguration rites for new building/s; and
g. Submit necessary reports/ recommendations.

2.4 Committee on the Testing and Commissioning of Radiation Equipment
Functions:
a. Coordinate with and request the technical assistance and expertise of the RHS-DOH;
b. Facilitate the inspection, testing and installation of all radiation equipment; and
c. Submit test and evaluation report.

2.5 Hospital Infrastructure Committee or INFRACOM
Functions:
a. Coordinate and consult with INFRA—DOH;
b. Prepare and review of plans for the infrastructure project;
c. Review of schematic plans;
d. Make recommendations and provide for the approval of schematic plans;
e. Facilitate infrastructure project proposal and prioritization; and
f. Submit final report and other additional recommendations, if there are any.

3. The Chief of Hospital shall review and approve the submitted reports. The recommendations provided by these committees must have the concurrence of the Chief of Hospital for them to be implemented. 

4.The Chief of Hospital shall oversee and ensure the regular submission of the hospital’s upgrading, development and financial report to the OHF and the FS of the DOH on a quarterly basis.


Section 6. Monitoring and Reporting:

Monitoring shall be conducted by the OHF, through its different services - INFRA, HMS, HOMS and RHS, on a quarterly basis. Reports on the implementation of the law shall be submitted by the hospital concerned to the said office.


Section 7. Funding / Budget

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 8316 shall be included in the DOH Budget Proposal subject to the approval of the DBM and the same shall be included in the General Appropriations Act for 2000.


Section 8. Effectivity Clause:

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.


</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>