Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>01/30/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2-A s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Shorter treatment course for Leprosy</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE:

Multi-Drug Therapy (MDT) is a proven effective cure for leprosy which renders treatment. The Department of Health since patients non—infectious a week after starting treatment. The Department of Health since 1987 has adopted and implemented the World Health Organization’s (WHO) recommendation of a fix duration of treatment for leprosy which involves giving 24 Multibacillary (MB) blister packs within 24- 36 months for MB cases and 6 Paucibacillary (PB) blister packs within 6-9 months for PB castes.

Based on multicenter clinical trials, a single dose combination of rifampicin,
ofloxacin and minocycline (ROM) is now an acceptable and cost effective alternative
regimen for the treatment of single-lesion PB leprosy. Furthermore, the duration of the
current MDT regimen for MB leprosy has been shortened to 12 months without
compromising the efficacy of treatment of MB leprosy.



II. OBJECTIVE

To shorten the duration of treatment of eligible PB and MB leprosy cases thereby improving treatment compliance.



III. COVERAGE 

This shall be implemented nationwide.

 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS


1. Bacteriological Index (BI) - the density of leprosy bacilli in smears which includes both living (sand staining) and dead (fragmented or granular) bacilli based on Ridley’s logarithmic scale. Readings can range from zero to 6+ as follows:

0 - no bacilli in any of the 100 oil immersion field
1+ - 1-10 bacilli, on average, in 100 oil immersion
2+ - 1-10 bacilli, on average, in 10 oil immersion fields
3+ - 1-10 bacilli, on average, in each oil immersion field
4+ - 10-100 bacilli, on average, in each oil immersion
5+ - 100-1000 bacilli, on average, in each oil immersion
6+ - More than 1000 bacilli, on average, in each oil immersion
 

2. Fix duration of treatment - a treatment regimen which entails the intake of 6 Paucibacillary (PB) blister packs within a period of 6-9 months for PB leprosy cases and 24 Multibacillary (MB) blister packs within a period of 24-36 months for MB leprosy cases.


3. Shorter treatment course - a treatment regimen which entails the intake of 12 MB blister packs within a period of 12-18 months for MB leprosy cases.


4. Single dose - one-time intake of ROM (a combination of Rifampicin, Ofloxacin, and Minocycline) for single lesion PB leprosy cases.


5. Single lesion - the presence of only one skin lesion regardless of size and location.


6. Slit Skin Smear (SSS) - a screening test for leprosy which gives an estimate of the number of IM. Leprae organism present.

7. SSS facility - a place equip with functioning microscope, SSS supplies (glass slide, scalpel, scalpel blade gauge 15), materials for antiseptic procedures, staining reagents for Acid Fast Bacilli (AFB) smear, and trained personnel on slit skin smear and microscopy for AFB - Mycobacterium leprae. 

8. Symmetrical - lesions on the right half of the body is the exact duplicate of lesions on the left half of the body (mirror image).



V. GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES:


A. ELIGIBILITY

The shorter treatment course for leprosy shall be implemented as follows:

FOR PB LEPROSY CASES:

1. New adult cases with single skin lesion and a negative SSS shall be given a single dose of the ROM regimen as follows:

Rifampicin - 600 mg
Ofloxacin — 4OO mg
Minocycline - 100 mg

2. New cases with 2 to 5 lesions however shall be treated using the fix duration of treatment course for PB leprosy cases.

FOR MB LEPROSY CASES:

1. New cases who shall be eligible for the shorter treatment course of 12 MB blister packs within 12-18 months are as follows:

1.1 In areas where there are reliable SSS facilities, a SSS examination shall be required wherein:

1.1.1 If the Bacteriological Index (BI) is 4+ OR LESS then the patient shall be treated with 12 MB blister packs within 12-18 months (shorter treatment course).

1.1.2 If the BI is MORE THAN 4+ then the patient shall be treated using the ﬁx duration of treatment course for MB leprosy cases.

1.2 In areas where there are no SSS facilities, the following clinical criteria shall be used to determine eligibility of patients for the shorter treatment course for MB leprosy cases:

1.2.1 New cases with more than five lesions that are asymmetrical and with well-deﬁned border or punched-out appearance (inner border is well deﬁned but outer border is poorly deﬁned) shall be eligible for the 12 month treatment regimen.

1.2.2 New cases with more than five skin lesions that are symmetrical and with ill-deﬁned border over the face, trunk, and/or extremities shall be treated using the 24 blister pack treatment course.

2. Patients who qualified for the shorter treatment course but failed to complete the treatment within the prescribed duration (12-18 months) shall continue treatment using the fix duration treatment course.

3. Previously registered MB leprosy eases who have consumed 12 or more blister packs within 18 months should be reassessed by performing a SSS.

3.1 If the BI is 3 + OR LESS then treatment should be discontinued and patient is considered to have completed treatment.

3.2 1f the BI is 4 + OR MORE then the fix duration of treatment course for MB leprosy cases should be continued and completed.


B. RECORDING AND REPORTING

FOR PB LEPROSY CASES: 

1. PB leprosy cases with single lesion shall have a patient’s chart be recorded only at the Cehtral Registration Form (CRF), and. reported on the Quarterly/Annual Statistics Form (Q/ASF). These patients after taking the single dose of ROM are considered as having completed treatment.

2. For PB leprosy cases with 2-5 skin lesions, the routine recording and reporting shall be utilized.

FOR MB LEPROSY CASES:

MB leprosy cases who qualified for the shorter treatment course shall be recorded in the usual Drug Collection Chart and CRF, but should be marked with an asterisk (*), and reported in the routine Q/ASF.


C. DRUG SUPPLY:

1. Drug regimens which include MDT and ROM shall be provided by the World Health Organization through the National Leprosy Control Program, Communicable Disease Control Service.

2. ROM shall be made available through the Regional and Provincial/City Leprosy Program Coordinator.



VI. EFFECTIVITY:

This order takes effect on March 1, 1998

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
