Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila 
Telephone No: 743-83-01 to 23 loc. 1125-1131

<date>03/09/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 10 s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Guidelines for the Development and Implementation of the Department of Health (DOH) Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project Civil Works Sub-component</subject>

<body>

1.0 BACKGROUND 

1.1 The DOH Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project (WHSMP) Maternal Care Component includes a Civil Works sub-component which will upgrade selected hospitals to enable them to provide 24—hour obstetrical emergency care through improvement of ward, delivery and operating room, triage and laboratory facilities and essential furnishings; will renovate selected rural health units and barangay health stations to enable them to support the provision of prenatal and post-natal care, as well as safe deliveries; will construct maternity waiting homes as “half way” houses for at risk obstetrical cases who live in very remote areas and lying-in clinics that provides normal delivery care on a 24-hour basis. 


2.0 ORGANIZATION AND PRINCIPLES

2.1 The Civil Works sub—component shall have four major phases of work. These are SITE AND FACILITIES INVESTIGATION (Assessment of Selected Health Facilities), PROJECT DEVELOPMENT (Preparation of Schematic and Design Development Plans), PROJECT DOCUMENTATION (Preparation of Detailed Architecture and Engineering Plans and Other Contract Documents) and PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION (Bidding and Awarding of Contracts and Construction). 

2.2 The overall-all responsibility for management and administration of this particular sub- component shall rests upon the Project Management Office (PMO) of the WHSMP with technical assistance from the Health Infrastructure Service (INFRA), DOH.

2.3 The engineering units of the Regional Health Offices (RHOs), being the regional technical arm of the INFRA as far as health infrastructure projects are concerned, shall render technical assistance to the WHSMP by ensuring the proper implementation of project guidelines in their areas of jurisdiction. 

2.4 The four major phases of work will be accomplished with the assistance of two consulting firms, the Philippine Center for Population and Development and the DCCD Engineering Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the Consultant.

2.5 The Local Government Units (LGUs), by virtue of a Project Implementation Agreement (PIA) executed with the WHSMP-DOH, shall support the conduct of the major phases of work by providing access to project sites, and needed data as well as monitoring and supervising the actual activities of these projects. 


3.0 GUIDELINES FOR THE FOUR MAJOR PHASES OF WORK

3.1 SITE AND FACILITIES INVESTIGATION

3.1.1 This phase of work will include investigation of existing health facilities which were previously selected pursuant to provision no. 4 hereof and to include hospitals, rural health units and barangay health stations sites and structures to determine, among others, their architectural and structural integrity, the state of usefulness and availability of utility systems, and the prevailing environmental conditions.

3.1.2 The Consultant shall perform the above work for all selected hospitals, rural health units and barangay health stations. Space requirement analysis and soil foundation investigation when necessary shall be conducted in areas where lying-in clinics or maternity waiting homes will be constructed.

3.1.3 For each province, the Consultant shall prepare a Site Investigation Report on all health facilities visited which shall be submitted to WHSMP-DOH three (3) weeks after completion of the site investigation. 

3.1.4 The INFRA Service shall assist the PMO in monitoring the work of the Consultant during the conduct of this phase of work. 

3.1.5 The Regional Health Office WHSMP Coordinator and Engineer together with the Provincial and Municipal Engineer shall assist the Consultant in providing orientation on the scope of work of the civil work sub-component of the Project to the Provincial Governor, Municipal Mayor, Provincial Health Officer, Chiefs of Hospitals and Municipal Health Officers prior to the start of this phase of work.

3.1.6 The Regional Health Office WHSMP Coordinator and Engineer shall extend the appropriate assistance to the Consultant in data gathering and in the conduct of periodic visits by the PMO, INFRA Service and/or the Consultants to the selected health facilities.

3.2 PROJECT DEVELOPMENT

3.2.1 This phase of work will include the preparation and approval of schematic designs of the hospitals, rural health units and barangay health stations to be repaired/renovated and of the lying-in clinics and maternity waiting homes, to be constructed.

3.2.2 The Consultant shall perform the above work, subject to the review and evaluation of the PMO through INFRA Service for all selected health facilities.

3.2.3 The Consultant shall submit a Report consolidating all the approved schematic designs on a per province basis.

3.2.4 As a rule, the approved schematic designs will be forwarded to the end—user (Chief of Hospital for selected hospitals and/or maternity waiting homes, and Municipal Health Officer for the selected rural health units and/or lying-in clinics and barangay health stations) for concurrence.

3.3 PROJECT DOCUMENTATION

3.3.1 This phase of work will focus on the preparation and approval of bid documents which include among others, Instruction to Bidders, Detailed Architectural and Engineering Plans, Technical Specification, General Conditions of Contract, Detailed Direct Cost Estimates with unit cost analysis for materials and labor and other related bidding documents like Bid Bulletin, etc.

3.3.2 The Bid Documents shall be prepared by the Consultant using the funding agency's Standard Bidding Documents for Procurement of Civil Works, Asian Development Bank (ADB) or International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) as the case may be.

3.3.3 The Direct Cost Estimates of the Approved Agency Estimates (AAE) will be based on the Bill of Quantities submitted by the WHSMP Civil Works Consultant. In case the Regional Civil Engineer finds any difficulty in the preparation of the Direct Cost Estimates for the AAE resulting from budgetary constraints and existing local conditions such as local price indices of materials or differences in labor costs; he is authorized to make the necessary adjustments through deletion or downgrading of minor items provided that these adjustments are done with the knowledge of the Project Manager and the Consultants who prepared the Bill of Quantities.

3.3.4 The standard Contract Documents of the funding agency will be used.

3.4 PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

3.4.1 This phase of work will include public bidding, awarding of contracts, construction period and final project acceptance and turnover.

3.4.2 The public bidding and awarding of contracts of projects partly or wholly financed from international institutions will be conducted using the guidelines stipulated by the funding agency. However, provisions of PD 1594 (Rules and Regulations for the Implementation of Government Infrastructure Projects) as amended and DOH A.O. 40s. 1996 shall apply in supplementary character.

3.4.3 The public bidding of projects will be done in the Regional Health Offices in order to tap the services and resources of the local industry. Accordingly, all regional health offices personnel involved in the bidding process shall temporarily be relieved of their regular functions during the entire process to facilitate contracting.

3.4.4 The Regional Infrastructure Prequalification, Bids, and Awards Committee (RIPBAC) shall submit to the DOH-WHSMP the bidding proposals of the first three lowest complying bidder including the Abstract of Bids, Minutes of the Pre—bidding Conference and Bidding Proper, Bids Evaluation Report and Resolution to Award before any award shall be made. These documents shall be sent to the funding agency for concurrence. 

3.4.5 As a general rule, contracts will be awarded at the Regional Health Office level and approved by the Regional Health Director.

3.4.6 The Regional Health Director shall be the contracting party in the Owner-Contractor Agreement.

3.4.7 The task of regular construction supervision of the projects will be the responsibility of the engineering units of the Office of the Governor for hospital projects and of the Office of the Mayor for RHU/BHS projects as provided for in the Project Implementation Agreement (PIA) between the DOH and the Local Government Units. They shall submit a Monthly Progress Report to the Regional Health Office not later than every 15th day of the succeeding month using the standard reporting form of the DOH-WHSMP.

3.4.8 The funding Agency guidelines shall be used in the contract implementation up to project acceptance and turn-over, however, PD 1594 provisions shall apply in supplementary character.

3.4.9 The Regional Health Office engineering units shall conduct periodic monitoring of construction work activities in their areas of jurisdiction. They shall prepare monthly status reports using the standard report for the DOH-WHSMP, copy furnished the INFRA Service. 

3.4.10 As a general rule, the completed projects will be accepted by the Regional Health Director, and the WHSMP Project Manager upon the recommendation of the INFRA.

3.4.11 The completed projects will be turned over to the Local Government Units by the DOH.

4.0 SELECTION CRITERIA AND SCOPE OF WORK FOR CIVIL WORKS

4.1 Provincial and District Hospitals

The causes of maternal deaths are often directly related to the need for interventions beyond primary health care capabilities. The first referral level obstetric hospital is therefore needed to provide these services. The essential obstetric functions at the first referral level are:

(i) to perform caesarean sections
(ii) to give anesthetics
(iii) to give blood transfusions
(iv) to carry out curettage for incomplete/septic abortions/miscarriages
(v) to perform other minor surgical OB interventions such as voluntary surgical contraception
(vi) to give neonatal special care

Selection Criteria for Provincial Hospital

The final selection of provincial hospitals will be based on the following criteria:

(i) located in a project province 
(ii) facility to which the rural health midwives and rural health doctors can directly refer;
(iii) requires upgrading of obstetric facilities (measured against a standard list of needs) to provide good quality, safe, and essential first-referral level facilities;
(iv) if the provincial hospital is within 15 to 30 minutes of the regional medical center which can receive referrals direct from the rural health unit staff, then the provincial hospital should not be upgraded;
(v) no facility will be upgraded to first referral level unless it already has the basic elements to provide emergency obstetric care already available or guaranteed by the provincial government (the package of needs is the minimum required and cannot be reduced or
modified); and
(vi) no facility will be upgraded for obstetrics care if the whole facility is in very poor condition and not planned for rehabilitation, or if a new facility is being planned, or if another financing source is planning improvements or upgrading.

Additional Selection Criteria for District Hospitals

In addition to the criteria outlined above, the following criteria will apply to district hospitals that are to be upgraded: 

(i) 25-bed capacity or greater; 
(ii) a facility to which the rural health midwives, and rural health doctors can directly refer, which is a maximum of 2 hours via local transportation for most of the rural population;
(iii) the facility has staff available to support 24—hour intensive nursing and emergency surgical care; and a minimum staff allocation of 4 doctors, 6 nurses and 8-12 trained midwives; and 
(iv) LGU is committed to support the district hospital's operation and maintenance expenses.

Scope of Work 

Each hospital will be upgraded to have:

(i) a fully operational obstetrics unit, including:

(a) a labor room
(b) a delivery room
(c) an operating room
(d) a septic room 
(e) an isolation room
(f) an examination room
(g) a nursery for intensive neonatal care 
(h) a reception and triage area
(i) a recovery room
(j) a sterilizing room, and
(k) adequate water, sanitation, and electricity infrastructure:

(ii) a laboratory capable of supporting blood bank and essential laboratory tests for emergency obstetrics. 

The decision of whether to build annexes or not in the provincial hospital is to be made by the end user in coordination with the WHSM Project Management Office, based on utilization rates and human resource complement. If in case the above criteria can not be accommodated, the minimum requirements of the Bureau of Licensing and Regulations for provincial and district hospital shall be followed. 

4.2 Rural Health Units (RHU)

The rural health unit is the closest full-time facility providing primary healthcare to a community. These facilities have a rural health midwife on call at all times. RHUs provide primary health care, minor surgery, (e.g., wound dressings, suturing) antenatal and postnatal care, family planning (pill and condom distribution, insertion and removal of intrauterine devices), nutrition, management of common infectious diseases, counseling and preventive intervention (e.g. immunization). 

Issues that presently compromise the quality of these services provided at these facilities include lack of privacy for clients; poor management of sterile conditions poorly maintained facilities and equipment; lack of essential equipment, drugs, and supplies; lack of reliable and clean sources of water and power; poor sanitation facilities, especially needed for women undergoing internal examinations and for antenatal clients.

Selection Criteria

RHUs that are selected will:

(i) have a permanent or assigned rural health physician; 
(ii) have a staff who is a resident of the catchment area where the RHU is being upgraded - where this staff can be called anytime from his/her residence to provide for emergency obstetrical care; 
(iii) serve larger population catchment areas with easy access to the facility than other RHUs;
(iv) be accessible to most communities and to the first referral level facility;
(v) no RHU will be upgraded if the whole facility is in very poor conditions and not planned for rehabilitation, or if a new facility is being planned or if another financing source is planning improvements or upgrading;
(vi) no RHU will be upgraded if the facility is less than 5 kilometers from any public health facilities; and
(vii) have political and community will and support.

Scope of Work

The Project will upgrade the facility to increase its capacity to provide acceptable, safe and quality women's health service by:

i) repairing existing infrastructure such as root, ceiling, guttering, paintwork;
ii) providing for connection to local electricity source if available;
iii) improving water supply to the facility
iv) improving sanitation facilities
v) improving the capacity to provide privacy for clients for physical examinations and counseling by having a separate room for this purpose;
(vi) improving the storage capacities for essential drugs and equipment;
(vii) providing capacity for observation area for clients who may need observation i.e. prenatal/consultation room; and
(viii) placing on the front door a board to notify visitors of the location of staff on call during weekends and nights.

4.3 Barangay Health Station (BHS)

The bararangay health station is the health post where the rural health midwife may base her work, and from where she may serve one to three barangays. The BHS should provide primary Health care; antenatal and postnatal care; family planning (pill and condom distribution); management of common infectious diseases; nutrition; preventive intervention (e.g. immunization) and counseling.

Issues that presently compromise the quality of services provided at these facilities include: lack of privacy for clients when requested; poor management of sterile conditions; poorly maintained facilities and equipment; lack of essential equipment, drugs, supplies; lack of reliable and clean sources of water and power; poor sanitation facilities, especially needed for women undergoing internal examinations and for antenatal clients. 

Selection Criteria

(i) serve larger population catchment areas with easy access to the facility than other BHSs - eg. BHS that can centrally serve three to five barangays.
(ii) located in the catchment area of an RHU that 15 being upgraded;
(iii) accessibility to the communities
(iv) no BHS will be upgraded if the facility is in very poor condition and not planned for rehabilitation, or if a new facility is being planned, or if another financing source is planning improvements or upgrading;
(v) no BHS will be upgraded if the facility does not have a permanent assigned midwife;
(vi) political and community will and support.

Scope of Work

To increase its capacity to provide an acceptable, safe, and quality women’s health service, the Project will:
(i) repair existing infrastructure such as roof, ceiling, guttering, paintwork;
(ii) provide for connection to local electricity source if available;
(iii) improve water supply to the facility;
(iv) improve sanitation facilities;
(v) improve the capacity to provide privacy for clients for physical examination and counseling by having a separate room for this purpose; and
(vi) improve the storage capacities for essential drugs and equipment.

4.4 Lying-in Clinics (LC)

The lying—in clinics offer services for safe deliveries; beds in which to rest for a few hours before returning home postpartum; and postdelivery counseling on mother and child care, family planning, and other aspects of women’s health. They also provide an opportunity for the midwife to supervise deliveries by traditional birth attendants and in—service training. They will serve as a point for stabilizing a women prior to transfer is she is suffering from an obstetrical complication.

The lying—in clinic will be attached in the ground of an RHU. 

Selection Criteria 

The RHUs that will be upgraded to provide lying—in clinic services will: 

(i) already have staff to provide services for women on a 24—hour basis,
(ii) be located in areas that are easily reached by most of the population;
(iii) be in the district with hospital that will be upgraded to first referral level obstetrical service capacities; and
(iv) be near the main road.

Scope of Work

(i) a three-bed labor/post delivery room
(ii) a delivery room
(iii) a toilet and bathroom
(iv) piped water
(v) electricity
(vi) three beds and bedside tables and
(vii) equipment for RHU midwives.

4.5 Maternity Waiting Homes (MWH)

The maternity waiting homes provide pregnant women in hard to reach areas with a temporary residence where they can be observed prior to delivery. Women can treat it like a home, can be accompanied by a family member, and can prepare their food, etc.

While in residence, the pregnant women can be more closely monitored by the first referral level obstetric facility through provision of prenatal care and can be quickly admitted to the first referral level facility (i) at the onset of labor, (ii) at the first sign of any complications, or (iii) if an unanticipated complications arises. The facility addresses two problems regarding early management of obstetric complications.

(i) women who are identified as having high-risk pregnancies may not like to stay for long periods of time in a hospital-away from family members, in unfamiliar surroundings and where they believe sick people should be;

(ii) women who may need intervention can be quickly transferred to the hospital at the onset of labor or a problem.

Maternity waiting homes will be in the grounds of the selected provincial or district hospital.

Selection Criteria

The selected hospital that will be upgraded to provided maternity waiting home will:

(i) have a catchment area population that is hard to reach;
(ii) have a facility with catchment area that have high levels of maternal deaths, perinatal mortality and morbidity;
(iii) have adequate space to establish a maternity waiting home;
(iv) have adequate manpower complement.

6cope of Work

(i) 2 three-bed room 
(ii) a toilet and bathroom
(iii) a kitchenette cum dining/receiving room
(iv) piped water 
(v) electricity 
(vi) 6 beds and 3 bedside tables


5.0 UTILIZATION OF SAVINGS FOR VARIATION ORDER 

Any amount of savings as a result of lower bids shall be used in the following prioritized item of works. Such savings shall be reprogrammed only within the province concerned.

5.1 Priority Item of Work

5.1.1 Water storage system
5.1.2 Repair or Replacement of Roofing
5.1.3 Flooring Finishes use vitrified unglazed tiles
5.1.4 Repainting of roofing, walls ceiling, doors
5.1.5 Repair/ Replacement glazed and unglazed tiles for toilets
5.1.6 Repair/ Replacement of windows, doors


6.0 EFEECTIVITY

All other orders and issuances inconsistent with this order are hereby rescinded.

This order shall take effect on February 16, 1998.

 
</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
<date>03/16/1998</date>