<date>03/24/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 12 s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: KABATAAN 2000 - Health Outreach Program Implementing Guidelines</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE:

Executive Order No. 139 dated November 28, 1993 mandated the Department of Health (DOH) to implement the Kabataan 2000 - President Youth Work Program through its department component program known as the Health Outreach Program (HOP).

HOP is a year-round youth work program designed to promote understanding and sense of awareness among the youth on critical health programs and issues such as population, environmental health immunization, nutrition, drug abuse, among others. It specifically aims to achieve the following objectives:

1. To instill among the youth a sense of awareness of the vision, mission, policies and programs set forth by the Department of Health;
2. To develop among them a Strong 3e113e- of commitment and dedication to the importance of community volunteerism and service;
3. To expose the youth to the role of the health sector and involve them in community undertaking as providers of basic health services;
4. To provide training and assistance to the youth to support their educational and career development needs.

To further strengthen the implementation of HOP, the following guidelines and procedures are promulgated.



II. COVERAGE:

HOP shall be implemented by the DOH national and regional offices. It shall cover the youth from 15 to 25 years of age who may either be:

1. In-school youth which includes high school, vocational and college students;
2. Out-of-school youth;
3. Special youth who are either youth with disabilities, indigenous youth, youth who ate victims of disasters



III. PROGRAM CYCLE

The program shall be implemented 111 two cycles as follows:

1. Summer Cycle - usually covers the school summer vacation from April to May for a maximum number of 44 working days.

2. Regular Cycle - covers the 1st Quarter (Jan.-Mar.) 2nd Quarter (Jul.-Sep.) and 3rd Quarter (Oct.-Dec.) Each Cycles covers a maximum number of 66 working days.



IV. The Health Outreach Program (HOP) Screening Committee:

To facilitate the recruitment and selection of youth worker for the program, an HOP Screening Committee shall be created at the national and regional levels. 

These national and regional committees shall undertake the following responsibilities:

1. Announce the job openings under the program through posters and other media available;
2. Evaluate the duly accomplished application forms and the supporting documents; 
3. Interview the applicants; and
4. Monitor and evaluate the Program implementation.

The composition of the Screening Committees is as follows:

1. Regional HOP Screening Committee:
1.1 Regional PIHC Coordinator;
1 2 Administrative Officer;
1.3 Regional Youth Coordinator;

2. National HOP Screening Committee
2.1 DOH National Youth Coordinator;
2.2 Selected Administrative Officers of Services at the Central Office.

The committee membership may be expanded depending on the need for a more efficient and effective system of recruitment monitoring and evaluation of the program.



V. QUALIFICATIONS TO APPLY FOR THE PROGRAM

To qualify for the program, a youth applicant:

1. Must be at least 15 years old not more than 25 years of age at the date of filing the application;
2. Must belong to the low income 111111in with a monthly family income of not more than Four Thousand Five Hundred Pesos (for a family of six);
3. Has not availed of the program in the previous years.
4. Must be fit to work.

“missing text”
I. Filing of Application “missing text”
Screening Committee the following documents:
1.1 A duly accomplished Personal Data Sheet (PDS) or Form I;
1.2 Certified true copy of birth Certificate or any official document in support of declared age;
1.3 2 copies of I.D. picture (size: 1 x 1);
1.4 Income Tax Returns (of the parents);
1.5 Any of the following latest school credentials such as diplomas, report cards, transcript of records;
1.6 Certification signed by the Health Center Midwife in charge of the barangay that the parent is an active Barangay Health Worker (Note: this requirement is needed if the applicant is a child of a BHW); 
1.7 Barangay clearance/certificate attesting to the applicants residency and good moral character.



VII. EVALUATION OF THE APPLICATION

1. Upon submission of all required documents, the Screening Committee shall:
1.1 Evaluate the application form and its supporting documents; 
1.2 Interview the applicant youth worker

The following points must be considered in the evaluation of applicants:

a. Preference shall be given to students or graduates who studied in public elementary and high schools, state colleges or universities; 
b. Priority shall be given to a child of a Barangay Health Worker or the marginalized basic sectors identified by the Social Reform Agenda such as farmer, fisherfolk, urban poor, and indigenous people and other disadvantaged sector such as
workers in the informal sector, person with disabilities, victims of disaster/calamities.

2. Posting of Successful Applicants. The Committee's decision on the applications shall be posted within ten (10) working days after the screening at the Office of the Chief of Staff Bulletin Board.

3. Additional Requirement for Successful Applicants. Successful applicants shall be required to submit medical certificate.



VIII. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Roles and Responsibilities of Agencies Involved:

1. HOP Recipient Unit/Services - The concerned existing Unit, Division, Service and Office of DOH and Local Government Units that will mobilize or utilize the services of DOH recruited youth workers shall be responsible for providing the relevant administrative and technical support needed by the program participants. The Service Director, shall designate a Core Person who will directly supervise, monitor and facilitate the learning process among the youth on a regular basis.

2. Regional Field Office - The RFO shall be responsible for the recruitment, hiring, deployment and evaluation of the regional HOP participants. The Regional Director thru the PHC Coordinator shall ensure that an adequate budget from the PHC Fund is allocated for this program, and  designate the Regional Youth Coordinator as the lead member of the DOH-Regional K-2000 Secretariat, and authorize his/her participation in the K—2000 Regional Action Officer activities.

3. Community Health Service (CHS) - The CHS shall coordinate the overall implementation of this order. It shall serve as the DOH National Kabataan-2000 Secretariat which shall beheaded by a National Youth Coordinator. Tt shall facilitate the participation and involvement of the Regional Field Offices in the planning and implementation of the HOP activities.



IX. INCENTIVES AND BENEFITS

A stipend of not more than 75% (if the applicable prevailing government minimum wage or an amount of One HundRed Fifty Pesos (P150.00) per youth per day per 5-day work per week shall be given to each youth participant.



X. FUNDING SUPPORT

All expenditures in the conduct of PWYP-HOP activities shall be chargeable against the National and Regional Primary Health Care Funds. Each region shall determine the number of participants for the program based on the Administrative Order on the utilization of PHC Funds issued in an annual basis. The utilization of funds should follow the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations subject to the availability of funds.



XI. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

Performance of the youth workers in their respective assignments shall be evaluated on the basis of their actual outputs and work attitude. The youth worker shall accomplish the Trainees Evaluation of HOP (PYWP Form No. II)



XII. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect upon approval of the Secretary of Health.


</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA-REODICA, M.D., MPH, CESO II</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

