Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines 
Telefax No: 711-6080

<date>06/18/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 22 s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines on the Processing of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Documents and Preparation of the Environmental Health Assessment Report (EHAR) for the Department of Health (Pursuant to the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Chapter XX, “Pollution of the Environment” of P.D. 856, Code on Sanitation of the Philippines).</subject>

<body>


I. Background 

With the introduction of more development projects in the different parts of our country, the health risks that we are facing may even be heightened despite the desirable benefits which can be conferred by these projects to certain communities. 

To address these and the other serious environmental health concerns, initiatives are being undertaken to asses and manage the hazards and risks brought about by these environmental changes which adversely affects health.

The integration of Environmental Health Impact Assessment (EHIA) into the  existing Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) system has provided an opportunity for the Department of Health to introduce the aspect of Health Impact Assessment (HIA) in  the preparation of Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). 

The DOH has since been a partner of the DENR in the process of reviewing the EIS of development projects. After years of undertaking this task, however, it was observed that the HIA component of the EIS submitted were barely given the prioritization being required. Hence, this initiative to strengthen further the EHIA process is being undertaken. 


II. Procedures

The following shall be the basic guidelines on the processing of EIA documents submitted by DENR (central and regional offices) for review by the DOH and the preparation of the EHAR, submitted by the DOH to the DENR in pursuance of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Chapter XX, “Pollution of the Environment” of P.D. 856 (Code on Sanitation of the Philippines).

A. DOH - CENTRAL OFFICE LEVEL

1. Upon receipt of the EIS document from the EMB-DENR, it shall be properly logged in the record book by the EHS—DOH stating the date document was received. 
2. EHS shall assign a lead reviewer who shall take charge of that particular proposed  project (administrative and technical aspect).
3. If necessary, an internal review committee shall be identified, which may include technical experts from other services/bureaus within the department. 
4. During the DOH review process, the committee/lead reviewer may invite a representative of the proponent for purposes of clarification explanation, if necessary, specifically on the public health component.
5. The committee/lead reviewer shall make the final EHAR within thirty (30) days upon receipt of the EIS documents, duly signed by all the members. 
6. The EHAR shall contain comments, recommendations and other inputs of the DOH to the EIA Review Committee. 
7. The EHAR shall be recommended for approval by the Chief, Environmental Health Impact Assessment Division, approved by the Director of the EHS and noted by the Undersecretary, if Office for Public Health Services before transmittal to DENR.
8. The EHAR shall be submitted directly by the lead revieWer and properly acknowledged by the EIA Review Committee. 
9. The designated lead reviewer shall represent the DOH in the EIA Review Committee, and shall participate in the scoping, review and inspection of the proposed project.


B. REGIONAL HEALTH OFFICE LEVEL 

1. Upon receipt of the Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) document from the DENR Regional Office, it shall be proporly logged in the record book by the Regional Health Office stating the date the document was received.
2. DOH Regional Health Office-Technical Division (RHO—TD) shall assign reviewer/s who shall take charge of that particular proposed project (administrative and technical aspect).
3. If necessary, the reviewer/s may refer the proposed project for comments and additional inputs by other technical experts within the RHO.
4. During the DOH-RHO review process, the reviewer/s may invite a representative of the proponent for purposes of clarification/explanation, if necessary, specifically on public health component. 
5. The reviewer/s shall make the final EHAR within fourteen (14) days from receipt of the IEE documents, duly signed by all reviewer/s.
6. The EHAR shall contain comments, recommendations and other inputs of the DOH-RHO to the DENR-Regional Office Review Committee.
7. The EHAR shall be recommended for approval by the Chief, Technical Division and approved by the Regional Health Director before transmittal to DENR Regional Office.
8. The EHAR shall be submitted directly by the reviewer and properly acknowledged by the DENR—Regional Office.
9. The designated reviewer shall represent the DOH-RHO 1n the DENR—Regional Office Review Committee, and shall participate in the scoping, review and impaction of the proposed project.

The reviewers/committee shall use the DOH official format in the preparation of Environmental Health Assessment Report (BHAR) (See Annex 1-EHS Form No. 201 for DOH-Central Office and Annex 2-EHS Form 202 for DOH-Regional Office).

The reviewers/committee shall, if necessary, request for additional information from the proponent through the DENR-EIA Review Committee or DENR Regional Office, as the case, may be. The request for additional information shall be transmitted to the DENR using the DOH official format (See Annex 3-EHS Form 203 for DOH—Central Office and Annex 4-EHS Form 204 for DOH-Regional Health Office).

This Order shall take effect immediately.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA NORIEGA - REODICA, MD, MPH, CESO I</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>