Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila


SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>02/26/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 6-A s. 1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Institutionalization and Management of the DOH Health Policy Analysis and Development Clusters (DOH-HPADC)</subject>

<body>



I. BACKGROUND/RATIONALE

Various activities have been undertaken to strengthen the capacity of the Department of Health to formulate, plan, implement, monitor and evaluate policies in the light of the rapidly changing policy environment. The Health Policy Development Staff, as one of the key players has attempted to contribute to all these efforts. It has conducted policy training courses to improve the capability of the Staff on policy analysis and formulation. It has also built up a  research and information database for a stronger policy focus decision—making. More importantly, it has set up structures and coordinating systems to facilitate policy decision and feedback among staff and top management. In particular, Policy Legislative Coordinators (PLCs) have been designated as point persons in each of the service and unit in the Central and Regional Offices.

To sustain improvements gained from such activities and to be able to respond to a fast increasing demand for policy development tasks, HPDS deems it imperative to enhance participation not only of the PLCs but also of other players and stakeholders in each of the major offices. 

This order is hereby issued to institutionalize Health Policy Analysis and Development Clusters and prescribe guidelines for its operations.


II. STATEMENT OF GOAL AND OBJECTIVE

Goal:
To improve the policy structures, systems and coordinating mechanisms within the DOH towards a transparent, info-based and participative health policy development process.

Objective:

To institutionalize in each major office a group which will primarily provide technical assistance in addressing policy issues.


III. General Guidelines

1. A Health Policy Analysis and Development Cluster shall be established in each major office to serve as a locus of policy development. This shall be composed of mid-level and technical staff and/or designated Policy Legislative Coordinators
(PLCs) who have been selected on the basis of their responsibilities, technical expertise and interest.

2. Policy issues which may be operational, programmatic and systemic in nature emanating from various services and units of the central and regional offices shall be elevated to and discussed by the HPADC.

3. HPADC’s recommendation shall then be proposed to the Service Director/Program Managers for consideration and approval.

4. The Health Policy Development Staff shall take the lead role in steering HPADC activities. It shall also be responsible for enhancing capability for policy development among members of the HPADC and other staff.

5. Advice from technical resource persons and policy experts from within the Central DOH shall be sought for direction and guidance.


III. Implementing Structures

A. Health Policy Development Staff

1. The Health Policy Development Staff (HPDS) as policy support structure to DOH shall:

a. oversee the HPADC activities through:
a.1 Coordination services
a.2 Facilitation of meetings/workshops and fora
a.3 Invitation of technical resource persons

b. serve as technical resource persons by:
b.1 Directing in policy discussions
b.2 Translating and packaging results of discussion into management user—friendly format.
b.3 Advocating policy recommendation to mangement and obtain support from other stakeholders.

B. Cluster/Sectoral Groupings

There shall be four Health Policy Analysis and Development Clusters:

1. CLUSTER A: OMS HEALTH POLICY DEVELOPMENT CLUSTER

The focus of this cluster shall be on management and administrative issues that may cut across the major offices within the Deparment (e. g. logistic management, personnel administration, fund management)

This shall be composed of representatives from Office for Management Service and its services/units:

1. Administrative Service
2. Procurement and Logistics Service
3. Management Advisory Service
4. Finance Service
5. Unyon ng mga Kawani ng Kagawaran ng Kalusugan Sentral (UKKS)

2. CLUSTER B: OPHS/OSC HEALTH POLICY DEVELOPMENT CLUSTER

The focus of this cluster shall be on issues concerning public health program planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation (e.g. nutrition, family planning, women and children’s health, environmental health, AIDS, TB)

This shall be composed of representatives from the Office for Public Health Service and Office of Special Concerns and their services/units:
1. Office for Public Health Services
2. Office for Special Concerns 
3. Non-Communicable Disease Control Service
4. Nutrition Service
5. Schistosomiasis Control Service
6. Communicable Disease Control Service
7. Environmental Health Service
8. Family Planning Service
9. Departmental Legislative and Liaison Office

3. CLUSTER C: OCS HEALTH POLICY DEVELOPMENT CLUSTER

The focus of this cluster shall be on issues which pertain to devolution, training, communication and information systems, community health service, among others.

This shall be composed of representatives from Office of the Chief of Staff and their services/units:

1. Local Government Assistance Monitoring Service
2. Internal Planning Service 
3. Health Intelligence Service
4. Health Manpower Development Training Service
5. Community Health Service
6. Essential National Health Research
7. Public Information Health Education Service

4. CLUSTER D: OHFSR HEALTH POLICY DEVELOPMENT CLUSTER

The focus of this cluster shall be on issues dealing with standards and regulation for health facilities (e.g hospital licensing, equipment maintance and infrastructure, cost recovery measures).

This shall be composed of representatives from the Office for Health Facilities, Standards and Regulation and its services/units:

1. Bureau of Licensing and Regulation
2. Bureau of Research and Laboratory
3. Bureau of Food and Drugs
4. Hospital Operations Management Service
5. Radiation Health Service
6. Health Maintenance Service
7. Health Infrastructure Service

Each of these clusters shall primarily be responsible for:

a. Undertaking complete staff work for the following policy tasks:
a.1. identify and review policy issues
a.2. review existing policies and related literature
a.3. organize consultations/meetings with stakeholders
a.4. propose and recommend policy actions
a.5. advocate and lobby for policy change
a.6. recommend policy action to management

b. Formulation of position papers particularly for the legislative bills.

c. Participation in all workshops, meetings and fora.

In preparing these tasks, HPAD Clusters are expected to come out with: Health Policy Agenda, Policy brief/papers, and Policy proposals. 

C. DOH Management

1. Program Mgrs./Service Directors/Asst. Secretaries/Undersecretaries shall:
a. Provide technical direction to the cluster
b. Consider and deliberate on policy recommendations of the cluster
c. Forward policy proposal to EXECOM for action

2. EXECOM

The EXECOM shall:
a. Discuss and approve proposal
b. Provide direction for policy implementation

IV. Coordination/Feedback Mechanism

1. Each HPAD Cluster shall convene twice a month. Schedule of the meeting shall be decided among the cluster members.

2. Special meetings for a particular cluster and all clusters may be called by the HPDS through the Cluster Team Leader as the need arises.

3. A representative from DLLO, LGAMS, HMDTS and/or resource persons from any other concerned technical service may also be invited in the cluster meeting if deemed necessary.

4. Each cluster shall provide feedback and updates to their respective Program Managers/Service Directors. Each shall also submit one page situationer/updates to HPDS on a monthly basis.‘


IV. Effectivity Clause

This order shall take effect on 16 March 1998.

</body> 
<sign>CARMENCITA N. REODICA, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


OSEC/HPDS
