Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>08/04/1998</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 5-A s.1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act, No. 7842- “An act establishing a one hundred (100) bed district hospital in the Municipality of Taguig, Metro Manila to be known as the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital, and appropriating funds therefor, and for other purposes.”</subject>

<body>

Pursuant to Republic Act No 7842, approved by His Excellency, PRES. FIDEL V. RAMOS on 16 December 1994 and in accordance with Article VI, Section 27 (1) of the Constitution, the following Rules and Regulations are hereby adopted.


Section I. Title:

This shall be known as the implementing rules and regulations of Republic Act 7842 “An act establishing a one hundred (100) bed district hospital in the Municipality of Taguig, Metro Manila, to be known as the Taguig— Pateros District Hospital, and appropriating funds therefor, and for other purposes.”


Section 2. Purpose:

These Rules and Regulations are adopted prescribing the guidelines, procedures for the implementation of R.A. No. 7842 to facilitate compliance therewith and achieve the objective thereof.


Section 3. Scope:

These rules shall apply to Taguig-Pateros District Hospital, Metro Manila.


Section 4. Acronyms:

The following acronyms shall be used in the implementing rules and regulations and/or the accompanying annexes or documents:

CO	-	Capital Outlay
DBM	-	Department of Budget and Management
DOH	-	Department of Health
FS	-	Finance Service, DOH
HMS 	-	Health Maintenance Service, DOH
HOMS	-	Hospital Operations and Management Service, DOH
INFRA	-	Health Infrastructure Service, DOH
MOOE	-	Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses
OHF	-	Office for Health Facilities, DOH
PS	-	Personal Services
RHO	-	Regional Health Office
RHS	-	Radiation Health Service, DOH


Section 5. Implementing Requirements:


A. Standard Requirements:

1. The following standard requirements shall be provided by the HOMS and INFRA for for the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital:

1.1 Standard Manpower Requirements per hospital bed capacity and category;
1.2 Standard Equipment and Instruments per hospital bed capacity and category;
1.3 Standard Hospital Site and Infrastructure Plans per hospital bed capacity and category; and
1.4 Standard PS, MOOE and CO budget estimates per hospital bed capacity and category.


B. Administrative Procedures:

1. On the basis of the DOH hospital standards, the DOH shall prepare the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital’s requirements and budgetary estimates, taking into consideration the said hospital’s proposed category, bed capacity, standard staffing, equipment, non-infrastructure/ physical plant and MODE relative to its establishment.

2. The INFRA, on the basis of the DOH hospital standards, shall prepare the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital’s infrastructure requirements and corresponding budgetary estimate, per proposed hospital bed capacity and submit said requirements to the HOMS within fifteen (15) days from receipt thereof.

3. The HOMS shall evaluate, prepare and consolidate the budgetary estimates of the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital in terms of standard PS, MOOE and CO requirement.

4. The HOMS shall send a copy of the consolidated standard requirements to the OHF for their final evaluation, comments and/or approval.

5. Any changes / revision in the budgetary requirements must follow steps 1 to 4.

6. Upon approval by the OHF, the requirements in terms of standard PS, MOOE and CO shall be sent to the FS for endorsement to the DBM and a copy furnished to HOMS for filing. A copy shall also be sent to the RHO-NCR.

7. Upon the approval by the DBM, the implementation of this Republic Act shall begin.


C. Implementing Mechanism:

1. The DOH, through the OHF shall oversee the establishment of the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital. As such, it shall organize the following Implementing Committees:

1.1 Site Assessment Committee
Functions:
a. Make necessary coordinations and consultation with the INFRA;
b. Determine the site’s status of ownership (Land Title / Deed of Donation);
c. Determine the site’s provision for expansion and the need for land development, if necessary;
d. Arrange necessary follow—up activities (Deed of Donation, etc); and
e. Submit reports on the evaluation and other recommendations.

1.2 Hospital- Pre-qualification, Bids and Awards Committee (PBAC) Functions:
a. Facilitate proper procedures relative to the bidding of the hospital’s infrastructure project and that of the awarding of contracts as based on INFRA’s prepared infrastructure requirements and budgetary estimates; and
b. Submit reports and recommendations.

1.3 Committee on Recruitment, Appointment and Training of New Hospital Staff. 
Functions:
a. Facilitate the advertisement of new positions and vacancies;
b. Create a selection board which will facilitate the necessary interviews and grading evaluation;
c. Facilitate the appointment of new staff;
d. Implement the necessary orientation and training program; and
e. Submit recommendations, updates and reports on the appointment/ hiring of new employees.

1.4 Committee on the Procurement of Equipment, Furniture and Consumable Supplies. 
Functions:
a. Coordinate with and request the technical assistance / training on specifications of equipment with the HMS-DOH;
b. Facilitate bidding and awarding of contracts;
c. Facilitate inspection of equipment, etc.;
d. Oversee the installation of inspected equipment;
e. Provide/ facilitate final acceptance;
f. Facilitate the inauguration rites for new building/s; and
g. Submit necessary reports/ recommendations.

1.5 Committee on the Testing and Commissioning of Radiation Equipment.
Functions:
a. Require the technical assistance and expertise of the RHS;
b. Facilitate the inspection, testing and installation of all radiation equipment; and
c. Submit test and evaluation report.

1.6 Hospital Infrastructure Committee - INFRACOM
Functions
a. Require the participation of the INFRA-DOH for their technical expertise on the matter;
b. Prepare and review plans for the infrastructure project;
c. Review and evaluation of the schematic plans; 
d. Make the necessary recommendations and provide for the approval of schematic plans;
e. Facilitate infrastructure project proposals and prioritization; and
f. Submit final report and other additional recommendations, if there are any.

The recommendations made by these committees to be implemented must have concurrence of the OHF for them to be implemented.


Section 6. Monitoring and Reporting:

Monitoring shall be conducted by the OHF, through its different services - INFRA, HMS, HOMS and RHS, on a quarterly basis. Reports on the implementation of the law relative to the Taguig-Pateros District Hospital establishment and development shall be submitted by the HOMS to the OHF.


Section 7. Effectivity Clause:

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately:


</body> 
<sign>FELIPE A. ESTRELLA ,JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


HOMS-OHF
IRR for establishment under DOH