Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Telefax No. 711-95-02 to 03

<date>09/30/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 41-B s. 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the conduct of Medical-Surgical Missions</subject>

<body>

I. Rationale and Objectives:

Medical and Surgical Mission (MSM) are conducted by the Department of Health (DoH), the Local Government Units, other government agencies, and local and foreign non-government organisations to extend medical and surgical health care services to Filipinos especially in under served areas.

This AO is issued to employ standards and implementation mechanisms on the conduct of MSM to achieve the following objectives:
1. To facilitate the implementation of MSM.
2. To ensure that Filipinos receive quality health care services that they need.
3. To ensure that integrated promotive, preventive, and curative services are provided during the mission
4. To update the knowledge and skills of health workers and augment/upgrade the equipment of the host health facility.
5. To strengthen the linkages between national and local government agencies and non-government organizations.

The objectives and implementing guidelines were developed based on the following guiding principles:
1. Under served areas shall be prioritized.
2. The sponsor shall establish linkages and networking with other concerned stakeholders in the immediate area.
3. All medicines, medical and surgical health care services shall be provided at no cost to the beneficiaries.
4. Qualified and competent medical and paramedical health workers shall perform the appropriate medical and surgical procedures.
5. Relevant knowledge, skills, and technology shall be caused to transfer to health workers of the host facility.


II. Implementing Guidelines:

1. The DoH Central Office, in consultation with the Regional Field Offices (RFO), DoH retained hospitals, and Local Government Units shall identify and prioritize areas where medical and surgical missions can best supplement or augment priority health programs and services. The list shall be updated regularly and made available to all stakeholders and sponsors.

2. The sponsors shall inform, seek written consent from the host LGU and collaborating organizations and health facilities, and conduct community preparation prior to the mission.

3. The sponsors and collaborating organizations shall comply with all clearances and permits required by the Philippine Government prior to the implementation of the MSM, including all DoH Administrative issuance's on donated pharmaceutical
products.

4. The DoH shall create a Committee on Medical Surgical Mission at the Central Office and RFC. These committees, in collaboration with the Local Government Units (LGU), and other government agencies, shall: .
a) formulate policies and guidelines for the conduct of MSM
b) provide assistance to all sponsors of MSM,
c) assess and evaluate the impact of the MSM, and
d) provide opportunities for participants to travel and appreciate local scenes and understand Filipino culture

5. The DoH, through the RFO, Specialty, Regional and other DoH retained Hospitals, shall provide technical assistance, as needed, by the MSM.

6. All medical and surgical procedures to be employed must conform to accepted local and international standards.

7. All medicine to be dispensed should follow the National Drug Formulary Vol. I current edition and shall have an expiry date of not less than six months.

8. All equipment must conform to the standards set by the DoH.

9. All cases seen during the MSM must be documented and furnish copies to all stakeholders.

10. A referral system to follow up all patients needing further treatment must be established by the sponsor and collaborating organizations.

11. A summary report shall be submitted by the sponsor to the committee at the end of the MSM.

This Order takes effect immediately and supercedes all Administrative Orders and other issuances inconsistent herewith.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
