Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
OFFICE FOR HOSPITALS AND FACILITIES SERVICE 
Bldg. 4, 2/F, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Trunk line nos.: 743-83-01 to 23 locals 1425, 1426 and 1427
Telefax no.: 711-95-72

<date>08/24/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 31, s. 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Modified Policies and Guidelines for the Implementation of Hospitals as Centers of Wellness Program.</subject>

<body>

I. Background:

With the Alma  Ata Declaration, the Department of Health (DOH) adopted the Primary Health Care as a major strategy to pro-actively address health  problems in the country thereby, promoting the health of the country and of the Filipinos. Correspondingly, the DOH hospitals conceptualized and subsequently implemented the Hospitals as Centers of Wellness Program.

The transformation of hospitals as Centers of Wellness is by itself, a declaration of life in its totality. With the implementation of the Hospitals as Centers of Wellness Program (HCWP), the public health found its way into the hospital. People’s participation in health promotion and disease prevention gained its ground. Furthermore, quality of patient care was upgraded and personnel well-being and work satisfaction were enhanced.

Existing policies related to HCWP are embodied in Department Circulars No. 195, s. 1993 and No, 182-C, s. 1996. For the HCWP to be responsive and dynamic not only to DOH hospitals but as well as to LGU hospitals, the need for its modiﬁcation becomes evident.

II. Objectives:

The HCWP seeks to attain the following:

1. Integrate Promotive / Preventive / Primary health care into curative and rehabilitative services;

2. Provide mechanisms for people’s active participation in hospital activities such as treatment, maintenance of cleanliness, establishment of support groups, networking activities, etc.

3. Install programs which shall promote personnel development, safeguard personnel rights and ensure a caring, communicating, compassionate and competent hospital staff; and

4. Formulate policies and systems, which will ensure equitable quality health care, that are relevant to community needs and the local culture, the comfort and relief of patients, relatives and the personnel as well.



III. Policies of the HCWP:

For the HCWP to be responsive and dynamic, the following policies are hereby issued:

1. Health promotion, disease prevention and primary health care shall be integrated into the, conventional curative and rehabilitative services. 

2. Establishment of support groups among patients, families and other volunteers.

3. Personnel well-being shall be promoted.

4. Technical support and opportunities for capability enhancement in pursuit of organizational and service excellence shall be provided by the National, Regional or local health agencies. 



III.  Guidelines and Strategies:

1. The policy on the integration of health promotion, disease prevention and primary health care into the conventional curative and rehabilitative Services shall be attained through:

1.1. Organization of Promotive / Preventive Program (PPP) Committee in the hospitals with the following members:

Chairperson:	 Chief of Hospital

Members : 	Chief of Clinics / Senior Resident Physician
		Training Officer/optional)
		Designated HEPO
		Coordinator of the different PPP Programs
		Administrative Officer
		Chief Nurse

1.2. Designation a Health Education and Promotion Officer.

1.3. Identification of priorities based on the leading causes of mortality and morbidity in the locality.

1.4 Strengthening of DOH hospital-based priority programs:
1.4.1 Tuberculosis
1.4.2 Diabetes 
1.4.3 Asthma
1.4.4. Dengue 
1.4.5. Reproductive Health

1.5. Intensfying health education programs for patients and their families, hospital personnel and the general public. All other appropriate programs suitable to the needs of specific localities shall be encouraged. 

1.6. Development, production and utilization of specific health education materials by the hospitals, with the technical assistance of the Regional Health Education and Promotion Officer.

1.7. Establishment of linkages with non—government organization, volunteer civic organizations,  people’s organization and other government agencies. 

1.8. Strengthen collaboration among hospital-based specialists and public health experts.

2. The policy on the establishment of support groups among patients, their families and other volunteers:

2.1 Organization of patients and their families into health clubs and other support groups.

2.2 Optimal participation of health personnel, beneficiaries and communities in the planning, implementation and evaluation of promotive / preventive programs in hospitals.

2.3 Development of a core of lay educators / counselors.

3. The policy on the promotion of personnel well-being:

3.1. Conduct of seminar-workshops and similar activities aimed at values clarification, identification of roles / contributions to the Program.

3.2. Implementation of Human Resource Development Program for hospital personnel.

4. The policy on the provision of technical support and opportunities for capability enhancement in pursuit of organizational and service excellence:

4.1. Coordination with the Central Office, Regional Health Office, Local Government Units, other health facilities in the locality for technical and administrative support.

4.2 Identification of resource and logistic requirements for fund sourcing. 



III. Ten Steps to Become a Center of Wellness:

1. Develop policies on converting the hospital into a Center of Wellness.

2. Implement a continuing hospital-wide orientation and values clarification.

3. Organize a hospital Preventive / Promotive / Primary Health Care (PPP) Committee to oversee and implement the program.

4. Train hospital personnel on Preventive / Promotive / Primary Health Care programs.

5. Promote excellence in hospital services and operations to ensure a competent and well-managed hospital.

6. Ensure peoples-friendly staff by promoting personnel welfare and job satisfaction.

7. Provide an environment conducive to health through clean and green premises, opportunities for interaction, psycho-social and spiritual support.

7. Establish a well-equipped health education area for the regular conduct of hospital-wide health education activities.

8. Mobilize the personnel, patients their families and other volunteers into support groups.

9. Establish linkages with the public health offices, other government / non-government organizations, volunteer groups, for service complementation, resource mobilization and program support.

Hospitals are enjoined to comply with the above policies and guidelines, to transform the hospitals as Centers of Wellness.

All other provisions that are not contradictory in the afore-stated Department Orders, shall still stand the effect.

</body> 

By the authority of the Secretary of Health:
<sign>ANTONIO S. LOPEX, MD, MPH, CESO I</sign>
<signtitle>Undersecretary of Health</signtitle>

TGV/era
order.doc p.4 / disk 5
O (56-1) 5/28/99 development
