Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
   

SAN LAZARO COMPOUND 
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NO. 711-60-80  

<date>09/13/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 39-A s.1998</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Bed Subsidy Program for Private Hospitals.</subject>

<body>

I. Rationale

Amidst the economic crisis our country is faced with, the government could no longer build new government hospitals and purchase highly specialized equipment in meet the increasing needs of the people. Partnership agreements with privately owned hospitals is necessary to ensure that the Filipino people receive adequate health care specially on emergency cases that needs immediate attention.

Anent to the thrust of the department in increase the scope and access to health institutions and to institute realistic scheme in providing financial assistance to legitimate clientele, the Bed Subsidy Program which aims to subsidize the cost of hospitalisation of indigent patients in private hospitals is being implemented through the Department of Health (DOH). This is supported by the budget line item allocating a specified amount in the annual appropriation for the Department of Health since 1980. In view of the above, the following guidelines to implement the Bed Subsidy Program are hereby prescribed.


II. Definition of Terms

1. Primary Level Hospital - Hospitals with capabilities for providing first contact emergency care and hospitalization for simple cases. They are equipped with the service capabilities needed to support licensed physicians rendering services in medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics and minor surgery.

2. Secondary Level Hospital — hospitals with capabilities and facilities for providing medical care in cases requiring hospitalization and the expertise of trained physicians. They are equipped with service capabilities needed to support licensed trained physicians rendering higher level of services in medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecelegy, general surgery and other ancillary services.


III. Implementing Guidelines


A. Hospital facilities and beds

1. Private hospitals shall be eligible for program subsidy only if the following requirements / criteria are met:

1.1 A general hospital, at least a 24-bed secondary level private hospital

1.2 Located in an area where there is an adequate government hospital facilities (i.e. nearest government is at least 12 km. away unless separated by a body of water or mountain terrain).

2. Primary level private hospital in a 4th to 6th class municipalities may also be eligible provided that they are capable of delivering health care services as primary category hospital in areas where there are no secondary government and private hospitals.

3. A fixed number of beds not exceeding 5 for primary hospitals and 10 for secondary hospitals shall be subsidized depending on the socio-economic condition, morbidity status and population size of the area.


B. Patients and Entitlements

1. Only the following patients shall be subsidized under the program

1.1 Indigent as certified by a municipal social worker and in his/her absence a barangay chairman.
1.2 Extremely in need of hospitalization as certified by a municipal health officer at head of unit of the nearest health facility.
1.3 Suffering from acute, short term diseases such as gastro-enteritis, respiratory, trauma, appendectomy and caesarian section cases. Pathological neonates requiring a specialize medical care not available in the facility where the
baby was born.

2. Subsidy for medical cases and routine laboratory exams shall be P250.00/ day at 5 days maximum, while subsidy for trauma and surgical cases shall be P300.00/day at 3 days maximum.

3. The necessary treatment and management of the patient shall be determined by the attending physician in the hospital.

4. Patients who are covered by third party insurance shall not be eligible for subsidy.

5. PCSO assisted hospitals provided with endowment funds are net eligible for the subsidy. 


IV. Implementing Mechanisms

1. The Regional Health Offices (RHO) through the Regional Directors are autherized to approve the participation of the private hospitals in the bed subsidy program using the aforementioned criteria.

2. The RHO shall submit at the start of each calendar year a list of participating private hospitals and their respective locations to the Office for Management Service (OMS).

3. A contract or memorandum of agreement shall be entered into between the RHO and the private hospital detailing administrative fund arrangements.

4. The RHO shall ensure that subsidy for private hospitals in the region shall not exceed the total appropriations released for the purpose. Further, it shall be responsible for preparing the report reflecting the amount utilized for each subsidised hospital.


V. Fund Disbursement

1. Program Fund is released from the Department of Budget and Management upon request of RHO. This may be in the form of lump sum based on the number of bed subsidies in the region. RHO shall in turn release funds to the private hospitals.

2. Private hospitals shall submit monthly bills to the RHO for reimbursement subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules and regulations.


VI. Repealing Clause

Administrative Order No. 27-A s. 1997, and previous orders related to bed subsidy program and other issuance’s inconsistent with this order are hereby rescinded.


VIII. Effectivity Clause

This order takes effect upon approval.

By the authority of the Secretary of Health

</body> 
<sign>SUSAN PINEDA-MERCADO,MD,MPH</sign>
<signtitle>Undersecretary and Chief of Staff</signtitle>