Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila

<date>10/05/1999</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 42 Series of 1999</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL AFFAIRS CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE (PACC)</subject>

<body>

WHEREAS, the 1987 Constitution fully recognizes the promotion of the general welfare as essential for the enjoyment by all the Filipino people of the blessings of democracy, unmistakably upholds the dignity of every human person, and unequivocally guarantees full respect for human rights.

WHEREAS, the State is mandated to protect and promote the right to health of the Filipino people and instill health consciousness among them to endeavor to make essential goods, health and other social services available to all the people, at
affordable cost and to establish and maintain an effective food and drug regulatory system. 

WHEREAS, this Department is primarily responsible for the formulation, planning, implementation and coordination of policies and programs in the ﬁeld of health, and in adherence to the Presidential program of Government popularly known as “Erap Para sa Mahirap”, now seeks to provide the greater number of the Filipino people access to high quality medicines at low prices during these times of economic hardship.

WHEREAS, the provisions of R.A. 6675 declared the policy of the State, inter alia, to promote, encourage and require the use of generic terminology in the importation, manufacture, distribution, marketing, advertising and promotion, prescription and dispensing of drugs; to ensure the adequate supply of drugs with generic names at the lowest possible cost and endeavor to make them available for free to indigent patients; and to encourage the extensive use of drugs with generic names through a rational system of procurement and distribution.

WHEREAS, this Department notes that despite the technological advances in their manufacture, distribution and sale processes, the prices of drugs and medicines, whether branded, generic or otherwise, are still not affordable nor cost based, and are still beyond the reach of the average Filipino people.

NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the provisions of the 1987 Constitution, R.A. No. 3729, as amended, R.A. No. 6675, and Executive Order No. 292, S. of 1987, as amended, and in order to promote the ‘Erap Para sa Mahirap” program of Government, there is hereby created and established a Pharmaceutical Affairs Consultative Committee to serve as a consultative body to the Secretary of Health composed of his designated government and private sector representatives, that would submit recommendations to the Secretary of Health on such pharmaceutical reforms, programs and measures designated as follows:

(1) to ensure strict compliance by every drug manufacturing company operating the Philippines required to produce, distribute and make available to the general public the medicine it produces in the form of generic drugs;
(2) to ensure strict compliance by persons enumerated in Section 6 of the Generics Act of 1988 of their duties and responsibilities, under the sanctions provided by law; and
(3) to ensure to the greater number of the Filipino people access to quality,  cost based and affordable medicines, whether branded, generic or otherwise. 


For its initial task, the Committee shall review and submit its recommendations on the following specific reforms, to wit:

(a) the drug industry proposal to. annually provide the Department of Health, at the least or concessional costs and/or by way of outright grant  or donation, such drugs and medicines contained in the National Drug Formulary, or the Essential Drug List, equivalent to such a pre-determined percentage of their total annual volume of drugs manufactured in or imported into the country as their contribution to Government efforts in alleviating the medical needs of the Filipino poor;
(b) the proposal to require drug companies to initially produce and/or make available drugs and medicines contained in the National Drug Formulary or the Essential Drug List in their generic form;
(c) the proposal to require submission of pricing policies and/or price discounts adopted by drug Companies in comparable markets In the Asian Region; 
(d) the proposal to reduce and eventually eliminate the registration of branded generic drugs; 
(e) the proposal to ensure, in coordination with the Department of Trade and Industry, a less tedious and speedier process for compulsory licensing;
(f) the proposal to allow parallel importation of drugs and medicines in the country; and
(g) the proposal to re-evaluate registration fees imposed by the Bureau of Food and Drugs.


For these purposes, the Pharmaceutical Affairs Consultative Committee is hereby directed and enjoined to formulate and submit its recommendations, within thirty (30) days from date of referral, on any and all proposed reforms/measures to attain the foregoing State policies and Department intents, for the approval of the Secretary of Health. 

Any and all circulars, memoranda, order and issuances, or parts thereof, inconsistent with or otherwise in conflict with this Administrative Order are hereby revoked, superseded, amended and repealed.

This Order shall take immediately.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
