Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue 
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Tel. No. 711-95-02/711-95-03

<date>10/13/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 133, s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE MANAGEMENT OF INDIGENCY FUND AT JOSE R. REYES MEMORIAL MEDICAL CENTER</subject>

<body> 

A. INTRODUCTION

Fund mounting to three million pesos per hospital (Php 3,000,000.00) was allocated to Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center, to support the medical needs of indigent patients. The hand was intended to subsidize drugs and medicines, medical supplies, surgical operations and other special procedures performed for indigent patients referred by the Secretary of Health.

This Order is hereby prescribed to institutionalize a more effective system for managing the Indigency Fund, formulate guidelines/procedures for a rational fund allocation utilization and install a regular fund replenishment process. 

 
B. GENERAL GUIDELINES

1. Eligible Beneficiaries

The following are eligible for support from the Indigency Funds:

(a) Indigents and/or underprivileged persons duly certified by DSWD (Social Case Study);
(b) Direct dependents of such indigent persons; and
(c) Indigents endorsed by Secretary of Health

2. Benefits Coverage

Hospital-related expenditures that qualify for support will include those for drugs and medicines, laboratory tests and procedures, X-ray, and other diagnostic procedures including ultrasound and other services, therapeutic procedures and other services deemed to be necessary for or needed by the patient as recommended by the attending physicians, surgical costs, and hospital room and board.

3. Fund Utilization Requirements

(a) Approval 

Request for medical assistance from Indigency Funds shall be forwarded to the Secretary of Health for approval with the following documents:

i. Summary of expenses charged per patient (Patient's Account)
ii. Copies of the patients' Brief Case History as prepared by the attending physician (Clinical Abstract)
iii. Certifications of Indigency Status
iv. Other Supporting Documents as needed

The Secretary of Health may, whenever necessary, delegate this authority to duly designated senior officers of the Department of Health. List and specimen signatures of other authorized signatories in the absence of the Secretary of Health shall be forwarded to Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center.

(b) Reporting Requirements

Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center shall submit a copy of Quarterly Liquidation Reports (QLR) to the Public Assistance Unit of the Office of the Secretary (PAU-OSEC) copy furnished Finance Service. QLR shall be forwarded within one (1) week after the end of every quarter. A monitoring tool/template will be utilized.

4. Fund Allocation

The Public Assistance Unit of the Office of the Secretary will conduct a quarterly analysis of Indigency Fund utilization. Allocation and distribution of Indigency Fund to Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center will be based on Fund Utilization Report

C. SPECIFIC PROCEDURES

The implementing mechanism will consist of a chain of activities that shall be initiated both at Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center and at the Public Assistance Unit of the Office of the Secretary of Health.

1. The following Office/person shall be involved in the process:

1. DOH Central Office:

a. Office of the Secretary
b. Public Assistance Unit
c. Finance Service

2. Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center

a. Office of the Chief of the Medical Center
b. Attending physician 
c. Social Worker(s),
d. Accounting and Control Units

2. The Specific procedures of the implementing mechanism are as follows:

1. The indigent clients seeking assistance to avail of this fund for medical assistance shall approach the Public Assistance Unit at the Office of the Secretary;

2. Walk-in clients seeking for medical assistance regardless of endorsement shall be screened by the Public Assistance Unit and will be recommended for approval to the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative.

3. Requests for financial assistance shall be approved only by the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative;

4. Approved request for financial assistance from the Indigency Fund transferred to Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center shall be the discretion of the Secretary of Health. Disbursements from the fund shall be subjected to the existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations;

5. Requests for financial assistance from the Indigency Fund approved by the Secretary of Health shall be referred to Dr. Jose R. Reyes Memorial Medical Center for proper action;

6. The attending physician shall prepare the brief patient case history, clinical abstract and prescribed course of treatment;

7. The hospital accounting/ﬁnance service shall prepare the Quarterly utilization / liquidation reports reflecting the charges made for the period against the indigency fund, attested by the Chief of the Medical Center and verified by the Commission on Audit (COA) Resident Auditor;

8. A copy of the quarterly fund utilization/liquidation report shall be forwarded to the Public Assistance Unit (PAU) of the DOH Central Office for analysis;

9. The Public Assistance Unit shall conduct a quarterly monitoring and evaluation, annual fund utilization review and other administrative concerns relative to the Indigency Funds.

D. REAPEALING CLAUSE

Provision of existing administrative issuances, guidelines or regulations inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, superceded or modiﬁed as required;

E. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
