Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound
Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz
Manila, Philippines
Tel No. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
Fax 743-18-29  

<date>07/28/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 94 s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines for the Restructuring Process and Staff Selection</subject>

<body>

In accordance with Executive Order 102 “Redirecting the Functions and Operations of the Department of Health” and Executive Order 165 "Directing the Formulation of an Institutional Strengthening and Streamlining Program for the
Executive Branch", the Department of Health Rationalization and Streamlining Plan  (RSP) has been approved with revisions by the Department of Budget and Management through the official release of the Notice of Organization, Staffing and Compensation Action (NOSCA) dated July 8, 2000 and by the Presidential Committee on Effective Governance (PCEG) through the issuance of Memorandum Circular No. 62 dated July 17,2000. As finally reflected in the approved NOSCA, the current organization and staffing of the DOH is being transformed into a more streamlined organizational structure and staffing pattern under Executive Order 102. With these issuances, the Department of Health is hereby mandated to implement the RSP.

This Order prescribes the rules on personnel selection and placement, retirement and/or voluntary resignation, consideration of appeals and other related concerns. All procedures and standards adapted under this Order were based on pertinent provisions of Republic Act No. 6656 “Rules on Government Reorganization“, pertinent Civil Service Rules and Regulations, Sections 76 to 78 of the General Appropriations Act 2000 and
Section 42 of Executive Order 292 "Administrative Code of 1987”.


I. SELECTION AND PLACEMENT 

A. General Guidelines On Selection and Placement

1. Four (4) Central Office Selection and Placement Committees (CSPC) shall be created. These CSPCs shall be responsible for the judicious selection, matching and placement of personnel consistent with approved staffing pattern under E.O.102.

There shall be a CSPC for each of these major clusters:
a) Health Regulation
b) External Affairs and Sectoral Support
c) Health Operations 
d) OSEC and Internal Management Support

2. All officials and employees shall be selected, placed or matched in accordance with  the new staffing pattern. All officials and employees shall be evaluated on the basis of relative fitness and the most qualified and competent shall be preferred except those  who have been discharged or dismissed due to administrative cases.

3. All officials and employees shall be evaluated on the basis of set standards and criteria. 

Relative to this, the criteria shall be as follows:
a) Education 
b) Training 
c) Experience
d) Performance 
e) Attitude and Personality Traits 
f) Potential

4. Selection, placement or matching to the plantilla positions in the approved staffing pattern shall be made in the following order of preference

a) First preference - Officials and employees who are holding permanent appointment to positions which are of the same rank/salary grade and who possess  the necessary qualification requirements and appropriate civil service eligibility for permanent appointment
b) Second preference — Officials and employees holding permanent appointment to positions next lower in rank/salary grade and who possess the necessary qualification requirements and appropriate civil service eligibility for permanent
appointment. 
c) Third preference - Employees holding temporary appointment.
d) Fourth preference - Contractual or casual employees who possess the necessary qualification requirements and appropriate civil service eligibility for permanent appointment
e) Fifth preference - prospective employees/ new entrants who possess the necessary qualification and appropriate civil service eligibility for permanent appointment


B. Selection and Placement Process

1. Upon approval of the DOH RSP, an approved list of positions per Cluster / Office shall be posted in the bulletin boards and other conspicuous places within the DOH central office and its field offices.

2. Selection and placement of officials to key positions (Director IV and Director III) shall be handled by the existing DOH Selection and Promotion Board for 3rd Level Positions.

3. Selection and placement of personnel to technical and administrative level positions (program managers, division chiefs and other rank and file personnel) shall be handled by the Central Selection and Placement Committees (CSPCs).

4. The CSPCs shall evaluate and assess the qualifications and competence of the personnel to be placed based on the criteria provided for in these rules.

5. Upon selection and placement of personnel, the CSPCs shall prepare the Placement List and endorse this to the Executive Committee for final approval.

6. Upon approval of the Placement List by the Executive Committee, the appropriate  appointments shall be prepared by the Personnel Division, Administrative Service (PD/AS).

7. On the basis of the Placement List via—a-vis the existing list of personnel in the central office, the PD/AS shall prepare a certified list of all employees not placed in the central office. The list shall include the personal information sheet and other  pertinent records of the personnel. 

8. This list shall be submitted to the Field Health Services Selection and Placement Committee (FHSSPC) which shall in turn determine placement or matching of all the personnel in the list to various regional offices and units of the DOH (i.e., Centers for Health Development, Regional Hospitals and Medical Centers, etc.)

9. Upon selection and placement of personnel in the various regional offices and units, the FHSSPC shall prepare the Field Placement List and endorse this to the Executive Committee for final approval.


II. GENERAL GUIDELINES ON VOLUNTARY SEPARATION FROM SERVICE 

1. No official or employee in the career service shall be compulsorily removed or separated from service as a result of the implementation of the RSP. 

2. In case the official or employee shall opt to be separated from the service, the PD/AS shall issue a written notice to the official or employee at least thirty days in advance the effective date of their separation from the service. 

3. All officials and employees including contractuals, casuals and temporary employees who opt to be separated under the DOH RSP shall be paid the appropriate separation  pay and retirement and other benefits under existing laws from the date of the  effectivity of their separation or from the date of the receipt of the resolution of their  appeals as the case may be; provided that the application for clearance has been filed and no action thereon has been made by the corresponding department or agency.

4. Those who are entitled to said benefits shall be paid a separation gratuity including all other personal services benefits in the amount equivalent to one ( 1) month salary for every year of service. Such separation pay and personal services benefits shall have  priority of payment.


III. GENERAL GUIDELINES ON APPEALS

In order to properly and immediately address appeals, issues and concerns of personnel, the following rules shall apply:

1. Appeals, oversights, issues and concerns related to personnel selection and placement shall be handled by an Appeals Committee.

2. For proper documentation, all appeals shall be made in writing. An Appeals Form shall be made available for all personnel.

3. All personnel concerned shall be given opportunity to present their side to assure  utmost objectivity and impartiality. If and when necessary, hearings shall be  conducted.

4. The Appeals Committee shall be expected to resolve issues, recommend options to the EXECOM or the Concerned personnel within 15 working days upon receipt of the said appeal. 

This order shall take effect immediately.

 
</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>