Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila
Telephone No: 743-83-01 to 23

<date>02/23/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 20, s. 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementation Arrangement for the Unified Project Management Team of the Department of Health (U-PMT DOH)</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE

In line with the mission of the DOH to ensure quality health care as a means of improving the quality at life of all Filipinos especially the poor, utilization of health resources need to be fully maximized and efficiently managed. Present scenario, especially of on-going foreign assisted projects (FAP’s) shows that there is duplication/overlapping/redundant application of project resources and non-institutionalization of project activities, which brings about wastage of the much needed resources. In view thereof, the management of DOH Foreign Assisted Projects must be unified and the implementing arrangement for this purpose spelled out.


OBJEETIVES
The objectives of the Uniﬁed PMT of the DOH are as follows:

A. To establish an integrated system for  project management;
B. To ensure that  project objectives are in line with overall health objectives;
C. To ensure that the goals and objectives of  projects are accomplished  on time, within budget and in conformity with sound technical performance standards.


III. ORGANIZATION/STRUCTURE

The organizational structure relative to the implementation arrangements of the U-PMT is hereto attached as Annex A. The terms at reference of the various offices, teams, designated personnel in the organizational structure are as follows:


A. External Affairs Office

The head of this office assumes responsibility for the overall administration of the U-PMT which includes inter alia operations, procurement and logistics, ﬁnance resource management, monitoring and evaluation. 


B. International Health Cluster

The head of this office assumes responsibility for direct supervision of the U-PMT for coordinating the technical and administrative key players of  projects and in organizing  project interventions ensuring that it fits into the overall comprehensive health objectives.


C. Project Management Committee

This committee is an advisory body and consists of the  project coordinators of the various  on-going  project as regular members, with the participation of representatives  from Project Oversight Committee of Government, whenever necessary. This committee has the following terms of reference:

c.1  provide overall guidance for the implementation of  projects
c.2 Establish accountability for the duality completion of  projects
c.3 Recommend to the Secretary of Health national health policies as offshoots of  projects
c.4 review/recommend policy guidelines for:
* Project life implementation plan
* Annual operational plan and budget
* Midterm reviews
* Final  project evaluation
* Research agenda of  projects
c.5 Recommend measures to ensure the sustainability of projects


D. U-PMT Operations Team

This Team has the following Terms of Reference:

d.1 Organizes the U-PMT
d.2 Oversees the U-PMT including the work and performance at its three other Teams namely: Procurement and Logistics Team, Finance Resource Management Team and Monitoring and Evaluation Team
d.3 Undertakes strategic operational planning involving all projects. Particularly, it shall:
* facilitate the planning  process
* consolidate/integrate the plans of the various  projects
* ensure the institutionalization of  project activities into the DOH  programs which the  projects support.
d.4 Coordinates the activities of the various key players of projects.
d.5 Performs oversight functions relative to  on-going  projects:
* for major activities
* to resolve issues raised by individual  projects
* to recommend management actions on policy issues and other unresolved issues
* to review/recommend approval of contracts of individual  project
d.6 The U-PMT will be headed jointly by a U-PMT Manager from the Health Operations or External Affairs Group and by a designated  project coordinator from  one of the FAPs. The farmer assumes responsibility for ensuring sustainability of project initiatives and their institutionalization in the concerned DOH Programs, while the latter assumes
responsibility for the sound technical performance of all on-going projects.


E. U-PMT Monitoring and Evaluation Team

This team has the following terms at reference:

On monitoring

e.1 Formulates a standard monitoring scheme/tool that delineates regional and central offices’ focus/indicators/concerns
e.2 Ensures a team approach for monitoring  on-going  projects
e.3 Synchronizes monitoring schedules that are area-based and considers multi-project approach

On reporting

e.4 Develops a standard reporting format that reflects a set of core information to facilitate decision-making at all level at DOH and likewise meets the requirements at donors

On evaluation

e.5 Develops core performance indicators and standards based on the objectives of Projects that are classified according to Project areas and thematic health focus such that policy issues are delineated from operational issues; technical matters differentiated  from administrative matters to identify offices responsible for these
e.6 Encourages participation of local expertise in evaluation activities to enhance in-country capability building and greater accountability
e.7 Schedules evaluation activities which should he participated by the evaluating teams of contiguous or converging  projects
e.8 Adopt a "multi-project evaluation approach to maximize learning and avoid duplication, especially in common areas
e.9 This team will be headed jointly by an assistant U-PMT Manager for Monitoring and Evaluation  from the Policy and Planning Group and by a designated  Project Coordinator for Monitoring and Evaluation  from  one of the FAPs. The former assumes responsibility for ensuring that the monitoring and evaluation systems of  on-going  projects are integrated and fits into the overall monitoring and evaluation systems of the DOH, while the latter assumes responsibility for monitoring/evaluating the performance of on-going and recently completed  projects and likewise, the performance of project personnel and technical assistants/consultants.


F. U-PMT Finance Resource Management Team

This team has the following term of reference:

f.1 Develops/recommends the establishment of a financial management system appropriate to all foreign assisted projects
f.2 Activate/establish monitoring and reporting system that would  provide a regular update of fund balances and utilization
f.3 Prepares a realistic disbursement schedule
f.4 Coordinates and synchronize the activities of the various key players involved in the financial management of all projects
f.5 Work on the effective institutionalization of the Financial Management System
f.6 Determines the training needs of  project financial personnel and ensure that these needs are appropriately met
f.7 Assist in the planning and implementation of the computerization of the Financial Management
f.8 This team will be headed jointly by an assistant U-PMT Manager for Finance Resource Management from the Financial Service and a designated project coordinator for Finance Resource Management  from  one of the FAPs. The former assumes responsibility for ensuring that GOP Guidelines which are not contradictory to the Financial
Agreement governing the Projects, are adhered to. The latter assumes responsibility for ensuring that the financial management guidelines contained in the Financial Agreements governing projects are adhered to; and for
monitoring the financial progress of all on-going projects.,


G. U-PMT  Procurement and Logistics Team

This team has the following terms of reference:

g.1 Develops/recommends the establishment of a procurement scheme applicable to all on-going Projects
g.2 Reviews/consolidates/integrates the annual procurement plans of individual  projects for goods, works and services
g.3 Sets up the schedule of activities of the integrated/consolidated project procurement plan at all levels national/regional/provincial, identifying milestones and critical paths and submits the same to the procurement and Logistics Service of the DOH
g.4 Coordinates the activities of all key players involved in the procurement activities of on-going Projects
g.5 Reviews draft tender documents and ensure that they are in consonance with the provisions of the loan/grant agreements
g.6 Ensures regularity of procurement processes which includes inter alia actual procurement process, contracting,
distribution and acceptance of the goods, works, services
g.7 Ensures systematic and effective documentation of all procurement packages made for all on-going projects.
g.8 This team will be headed jointly by an assistant U-PMT Manager for  Procurement and Logistics from the Procurement and Logistics Service and a designated Project Coordinator for Procurement and Logistics from one of the FAPs. The former assumes responsibility for undertaking the  procurement activities of all on-going Projects; ensuring that GOP procurement guidelines which are in consonance with the  provisions of the loan/grant
agreements are adhered to. The latter assumes responsibility for ensuring that all project procurement plans
are consolidated, undertaken within the scheduled timelines and  procured in consonance with the provisions of the loan/grant agreements.


H. Regional Foreign Assisted Projects Team

Every Regional foreign Assisted Projects Team consists of the Regional Health Director as head and a composite group of three members, which is lodged within the Health Operations cluster of the Region. These members consists of a finance personnel, a procurement and logistics officer and a monitoring and evaluation officer. The team shall have the following Terms of Reference:

h.1 Organizes the Regional Foreign Assisted Projects’ Team
h.2 Supervises and monitors the implementation of the activities of Projects within the Region and in the provinces under the Region’s area of responsibility
h.3 Undertakes procurement activities of projects at the regional level, in consonance with the procurement guidelines provided for in the Projects’ Covenants
h.4  provides technical assistance in the Regional planning activities of  on-going  Projects and consolidates/integrates these plans, ensuring institutionalization and sustainability
h.5 Coordinates the activities of all  projects with the various key players of the projef6 at that level
h.6 Ensures efficient management of  Projects' funds at the Regional level


IV. COORDINATION SCHEMES

The coordination flow of the activities of the U-PMT is attached hereto as Annex 2. In addition to this, the following meetings shall be regularly held to ensure the effectiveness of the systems and procedures set forth in this document: 

A. Weekly U-PMT Team meetings — to be chaired by Team heads/leaders
B. Weekly Inter U-PMT Team meetings — to be chaired by the Operation Team head/leader
C. Weekly International Health Cluster meetings to be chaired by the Undersecretary, External Affairs Office
D. Quarterly Project Management committee meetings to be chaired by the International Health Cluster Head
E. Semi -annual Project Review Missions (March to April; September to October)

This Order takes effect immediately.

</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secoetary of Health</signtitle>