Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 

BLDG. 1, SAN LAZARO COMPOUND
RIZAL AVENUE, STA. CRUZ,
MANILA, PHILIPPINES
TEL NOS. 711-95-02, 711-95-03
TELEFAX NO.: 743-18-29

<date>03/21/2000</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 27 s., 2000</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: ESTABLISHING THE STANDARD PROCEDURE IN THE CONDUCT OF REVIEW MISSIONS FOR ON-GOING DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH PROJECTS</subject>

<body>

I. RATIONALE

The DOH is currently implementing several foreign assisted projects, each of which requires regular periodic performance assessment / evaluation. It has been observed that in the past, these activities were undertaken in accordance with the peculiarity and discretion of the individual project management offices. As such, the results of project performance audits provided varying levels of appreciation. In view of this and in line with the objective of the DOH of integrating management of foreign assisted projects, it is imperative that a uniform procedure be established to ensure effective project assessment and evaluation which results shall be utilized to appropriately provide the direction to project management/implementation.


II. OBJECTIVES

1. To designate a specific period whereby Program Managers of all on going projects are encouraged to conduct Project Reviews and to set the frequency thereof;

2. To enhance / maximize the participation of the concerned project key players in these reviews;

3. To make a detailed presentation of Review findings to the concerned national / sub-national middle managers and ensure their commitment in undertaking appropriate measures to allow effective project implementation;

4. To make an integrated presentation of Review findings that bear on policy/management issues to DOH management and ensure full support and commitment in undertaking the necessary measures to allow effective project administration/management.


STRATEGIES / PROCEDURES


1. Simultaneous reviews of all on-going Foreign Assisted projects shall be held semi-annually between the periods March to April and September to October of each year. The concerned project Management Office should coordinate with concerned Task Manager or Project Officer of the funding institution(s) to synchronized his/her schedule with the DOH review schedule.


2. Participation to Project reviews shall include all concerned project key players, to wit: 

2.1 The concerned project Coordinator shall participate in review Mission Start up activities; 

2.2 The concerned project Coordinator and the concerned technical program staff shall participate in the technical / component services meetings;

2.3 The concerned Regional Health Office staff and the LGU/NGO concerned personnel shall participate in field reviews/assessments; 

2.4 The concerned project Coordinator staff, team leaders of the Operations Team and the Monitoring and Evaluation Team of the Unified Project Management Office and the cluster Head of the International Health Cluster shall participate in the wrap activities.

2.5 The concerned Project Management Office staff shall participate in the entire period of the project review.


3. Scope of the Review

3.1 The review shall cover the six (6) months period prior to the current review

3.2 It shall consist of

3.2.1 Desk review of the project Report prepared by the Project Management Office which covers the following:

3.2.1.1 Progress relative to the critical benchmarks identified in the plan ( for new projects ) or in the previous review period ( for on-going projects )

3.2.1.2 Physical and financial progress by component ( cummulative progress and progress for the 6 months under review )

3.2.1.3 Problems / issues encountered in the period under review

3.2.1.4 Measure undertaken / recommended to resolve problems / issues encountered

* The aforementioned report shall be distributed to the review team one (1) week prior to the review period.

3.2.2 Validation of selected data contained in the report through actual ﬁeld visits to selected project sites

3.2.2.1 Meeting with the sub-national project key players at the selected project site to review project implementation progress at that level

3.2.2.2 Actual ﬁeld visit to project sites

3.2.2.3 Exit conference to discuss findings and recommendations

3.2.3 Identification of critical benchmarks for the subsequent six (6) months period and formulation of an action plan indicating the office person responsible in the accomplishment thereof.

3.2.4 Review mission report writing


4. Presentation / dissemination of review Findings/Recommendations

4.1 The review findings particularly the recommended actions shall be discussed in detail during wrap—up meeting. All project key players present must conﬁrm the agreements made relative to the recommended next steps and the initial benchmarks

4.2 The plans indicated in 3.2.3 shall be presented to the UPMT in the first week of the month following the Review period. The UPMT shall enumerate technical and policy/management issues that need to be resolved and present this in the International Health Cluster meeting scheduled that same week.

4.3 The International Health Cluster head, shall be responsible for raising the issues so identified in the Inter Cluster Inter Coordination ( ICIC ) meeting and make the necessary follow-up. At the level until the identified issues are finally resolved.

This order takes effect immediately.

 
</body> 
<sign>ALBERTO G. ROMUALDEZ, JR., MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
