Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
2nd Flr., Bldg. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Manila
  
  
<date>05/09/2001</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 11-A s. 2001</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Amendment to Administrative Order No. 164-A s. 2000 “Guidelines on Foreign Fellowships, Scholarships and Training”</subject>


<body>

l. RATIONALE
In line with the govemment’s austerity measures and to conserve dollar or foreign reserves as well as consistent with the government’s efforts to promote efficient public service and simple lifestyle of public servants, the following guidelines shall be adhered to in relation to application and permission to travel abroad of Department personnel.

II. DEFINITION OF TERMS

A. Official Time — on the condition that the travel is for the purpose of compliance with an international commitment, contractual obligation, or in connection with training and scholarship of career ofﬁcials and personnel, fully covered or subsidized by grants, sponsors, fellowship; programs or such other similar financing schemes utilizing resources other than that of government; all expenses and charges for accommodation, travel, food, per diem allowances are provided for by the inviting and sponsoring entity and no government expenses are claimed/reimbursed except for reasonable pre-departure and clothing allowance; personnel are entitled to payment of salaries and other monetary beneﬁts as authorized by DBM.

1. “International commitment” shall be understood to mean such obligations arising from bilateral or multilateral agreements, treaties with foreign governments or internationally recognized and duly accredited foreign institutions. and its entities, where the Philippines is an active member or recognized observer or has applied membership thereof.

2. “Contractual obligations” shall refer to perfected agreements and contracts with private companies, or wholly or partially owned and controlled public corporations, where provisions for such travel abroad is included and embodied in the loan, grant, purchase, credit arrangement, and like agreements and in certain cases, in the consultancy contract

3. “Fully covered or subsidized" shall refer to such training, grants, fellowship, seminar or studies offered by internationally accredited universities, academic institutions, or learning institutions in connection with the personal and professional growth and development of an official and employee’s career path

a. “Pre-departure expense” shall cover miscellaneous/ incidental expenses such as tax, (local) fare, ofﬁcial (red) passport, photographs, immunization, visa fees, porterage and airport terminal fees

b. “Clothing allowance” in such amount and rate already provided for by applicable executive issuances shall be permitted only when the scheduled trip abroad is in tropical countries with a dUration of more than 1 month or in temperate countries for periods coinciding with the autumn or winter seasons regardless of the duration; this shall not be granted oftener than once in every twenty-four (24) months and a certification shall be submitted to the effect that no clothing allowance had been received duringthe preceding twenty-four(24) months

B. Official Business won the condition that the travel is initiated by the Department or in conjunction with other government entity or in relation to plans and policy thrusts of the Office of the President for the purpose of fostering better relations, business or trade ties, technological transfer, medical or humanitarian missions or any such avowed declaration of the President of the Philippines, or for the purpose of compliance with an international commitment as deﬁned previously, of which government funds, wholly or in part, are to be disbursed for the payment of all expenses relative to such trip; personnel are entitled to payment of salaries and other beneﬁts as authorized by DBM.

C. Leave of Absence- all other applications for authority to travel abroad when not falling under travels on “official business" or “official time” shall be based on a duly approved application for leave of absence.

III. GENERAL GUIDELINES

A. All travels funded directly or indirectly, fully or partially, by private contractors or suppliers of goods, medical equipment, services, medicines and the like for the purpose of undertaking a study or an assessment of their capacities/capabilities as such contractors or suppliers shall be on leave of absence.

B. In instances involving more than one employee/staff for attendance to one and the same event/conference, the office concerned shall see to it that the number of participants is kept to the barest minimum without sacriﬁcing effective representation and responsibility of each number of the delegation speciﬁcally mentioned and justiﬁed In the travel proposal. When 2 or more ofﬁcials shall perform an act' In the same capacity during the same event/activity , only one shall be permitted to attend. Conversely, when 2 or more tasks can be effectively handled by one person, only the most suitable shall be permitted to go. Under no circumstance shall spouses, family members, friends or other hangers on be allowed to accompany said official that would burden government in any manner whatsoever unless they do so purely at their own expense without any contribution, part or any amount disbursed and paid for by government.

IV. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES

A. Process of Flow in the DistribUtlon of Invitations/Course Announcements, Acceptance and Issuance of Travel Authority and Department Order

1. Invitations for foreign feIlowship/scholarship/training received by the Office of the Secretary of Health and by other DOH Ofﬁces shall be forwarded to BIHC for processing and monitoring.
2. BIHC shall endorse said invitation within 24 hours to HHRDB for distribution to concerned ofﬁces.
3. HHRDB shall distribute the invitation to concerned Center! Bureau/Center for Health Development/Hospital. Concerned unit shall prescreen nominees on the basis of the criteria below. Within five (5) working days, name of nominee shall have been forwarded by HHRDB to BIHC for processing of necessary documents.
4. BIHC shall recommend approval of all names of nominees and submit to the Technical Working Group on Foreign Travels for discussion every Friday prior to final approval of the Secretary of Health.
5. a. For study trips, all travels on ofﬁcial time or ofﬁcial business involving the Department Secretary, Undersecretaries and Assistant Secretaries and other ofﬁcials with equivalent ranks shall be transmitted by BIHC to the Office of the President for clearance.
b. For non-study trips of all officials below Assistant Secretaries, all travels on ofﬁcial time or ofﬁcial business that will last for more than one (1) calendar month, those that will involve two (2) or more persons regardless of rank and expenses shall be transmitted by BIHC to the Ofﬁce of the President for clearance.
6. Endorsement from the Office of the President serves as travel authority which can be used to process documents at the Department of Foreign Affairs. This will also be used in the drafting of the Department Order by BIHC.
7. Other than the cases cited in lV-A (5) , Department Order and Travel Authority can be processed by the BIHC once the travel is approved by the Office of the Secretary.
8. Travel authority for those on leave of absence can be issued by BIHC once approved by the respective heads of ofﬁce and the Technical Working Group on Foreign Travels.

B. Criteria on the Selection of Nominees
The candidates shall be screened based on the following criteria:

a. Performance 20%
b. Human resource development needs 25%
c. Relevance to present duties and responsibilities to the fellowship/area of specialization 35%
d. With no previous/pending foreign scholarship 10%
e. Geographic assignment 10%

C. Lead Time for Issuance of Travel Authority
1. Requests for travel-authority on ofﬁcial time and ofﬁcial business shall be submitted to BIHC at least three (3) weeks before the scheduled travel and the same will be submitted to the TWG on Foreign Travels for discussion and deliberation.
2. Requests for travel authority on leave of absence shall be submitted to BIHC two (2) weeks before the scheduled travel for processing.

All other provisions of Administrative Order 164-A s. 2000 are still in effect and full force.

This Order takes effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>