Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Sta. Cruz, Manila
Telephone No: 3743-83-01 to 23

 
<date>09/16/2001</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 49 s. 2001</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Adoption of the Standard Days Method (SDM or "Necklace Method") as additional NFP Method for the Philippines FP Program</subject>
 
 
<body>

I. Background/Rationale

Recognizing the need to match population growth with economic growth to move the country towards sustainable development, the government expressed the urgency of adopting population management policies that will take into consideration reproductive health approaches that respect Filipino culture and values and promotes equality between men and women.

In 1998, the Department of Health established the Reproductive Health (RH) Program which aims to provide universal access to quality RH services, including Family Planning (FP) as one of the critical elements. The goal of the Reproductive Health/Family Planning Program is to provide information and services to all men and women of reproductive age whenever and wherever these are needed. Quality FP services which includes provision of safe and effective family planning methods will be made accessible, available and affordable in all health care facilities nationwide.

One strategy employed by the DOH is to broaden the array of effective modern FP methods available for clients, giving them wider options for selecting a method consistent with their beliefs and appropriate to their health status, helping couples achieve their desired family size.

As demonstrated by previous surveys, Expanding Options, Improving Access (1997), IRH Georgetown University, 15% of couples who use any family planning method are actually using periodic abstinence to avoid pregnancy. Most are abstaining from intercourse based on an incorrect understanding of when the woman is likely to get pregnant, as they have not received any formal instructions on how to use natural family planning methods (NFP).

In the Philippines, there remains a signiﬁcant unmet need for family planning, which partially can be met by expanding the availability and accessibility of NFP services. While utilization of NFP is low comprising 0.2 % of total FP users (NDHS, 1998— Phils.), the NFP experience in the Philippines has much to offer in the area of expanding choice for family planning. Its full potential therefore could be tapped to help those who are still looking for a method to suit them best.

Towards this end, the DOH in partnership with the Institute for Reproductive Health (IRH) tested a new natural family planning method known as Standard Days Method (SDM) or “Necklace Method". This method is now ofﬁcially adopted for use in the country and will be mainstreamed in the Philippines Family Planning Program.

II. The Standard Days Method or “Necklace Method"

SDM popularly referred to as "Necklace Method" is a simple method which is primarily based on abstinence from unprotected intercourse on days 8-19 for women whose cycles are between 26-32 days to avoid pregnancy.

The popular name is derived from the mnemonic device, a necklace (or collar in Spanish) with 32 plastic beads. The necklace represents a woman’s menstrual cycle, with the colored beads representing different phases of the cycle. The single red bead represents the ﬁrst day of this cycle followed by 6 brown beads, which accounts for the ﬁrst 7 safe days or infertile days. 12 white beads follows the strand which represents fertile days where couples are advised to refrain from unprotected sexual intercourse (days 8—19). The last 13 brown beads represents the remaining 13 safe days (days 20-32). Each day, the woman moves a tight ﬁtting rubber ring along the necklace. Based on the color of the bead where the ring is located, the couples are given the cue for action whether to have or refrain from having sexual intercourse.

For clients who used the method correctly with abstinence, it is 95% effective. For those who used it correctly but with back—up methods (e.g. condoms) on fertile days, it is 94% effective. For typical use (sometimes correctly used and sometimes incorrect on fertile days), it is 88% effective. The efﬁcacy study for SDM conducted in the Philippines (1999 to 2001) showed that it is highly acceptable to women, their partners and health providers. The method is natural, affordable and easy to learn and use as it requires no calculations, observations or charting.

III. Implementing Guidelines
A. Scope and Coverage

The Standard Days Method shall be adopted as a new addition to NFP methods made available in health facilities nationwide. The method therefore should not replace other existing modern FP methods (artiﬁcial or natural) currently available in the
country.

SDM shall be attractively positioned as a better method to use for couples who are:

a. using periodic abstinence or rhythm incorrectly;
b. relying on withdrawal; and those
c. who are using condoms inconsistehtly and irregularly.

As these couples constitutes about 18% of all family planning users who continue to use traditional methods (NDHS, 1998-Phils.), shifting them to the more reliable modern NFP is already a substantial achievement for Family Planning Program in the country.

Moreover, SDM should also be routinely offered as an additional option for couples in search for a suitable NFP method.

B. Mainstreaming of Services

Mainstreaming of SDM to Family Planning services shall be implemented in phases. Initial implementation should cover Metro Manila, including the identiﬁed priority urban poor areas. Based on the subsequent evaluation of this phase, mainstreaming of SDM should be expanded to other regions in the country.

SDM should be made available in the following service delivery areas:

a. hospitals
b. rural health units (RHUs)
c. barangay health stations (BHS)
d. NGO clinics; and during
e. home visits of Volunteer Health Workers (VHWs)

The method shall be ofﬁcially reported as “Necklace Method.” The client is considered new acceptor (NA) upon receiving the necklace. One month afterwards, the client is now considered a current user (CU).

IV. Institutional Arrangements

To support mainstreaming of SDM to FP services and ensure the smooth implementation of this new method, the following stakeholders shall be responsible for the corresponding identiﬁed roles and functions:

1. The Center for Family and Environmental Health shall oversee the overall implementation of the method. Speciﬁcally the CFEH shall:

a. develop policies, standards and guidelines relative to SDM implementation
b. develop the training curriculum and instructional materials
c. develop prototype IEC materials
d. conduct training of trainers at the regional, provincial/city levels
e. provide technical assistance to implementing partners
f. mobilize resources to support mainstreaming activities
g. develop recording and reporting system for SDM as a program method
h. monitor and evaluate progress and status of SDM implementation

2. The Centers for Health Development shall be responsible for the management of implementation of SDM at the regional level, including :

a. training of trainers at provincial/city level
b. reproduction of prototype IEC and training materials
c. provision of technical assistance to LGU and NGO partners
d. monitoring 81 evaluation of method implementation at the regional level, LGU and NGO partners
e. management of information systems
f. resource mobilization to support SDM related activities

3. The Institute of Reproductive Health shall assist in the mainstreaming of SDM in Family Planing services by:

a. providing technical assistance in the conduct of initial training of trainers
b. conduct operations research on SDM service delivery mechanisms
c. review and evaluate training program and IEC materials developed for SDM as necessary
d. mobilize resources to support implementation of the method in the Philippines

V. Monitoring & Evaluation

For efﬁcient and effective planning and project implementation, regular monitoring and evaluation activities shall be conducted as follows:

a. Quarterly SDM review at the provincial level with participation from NGOs, health staff at city and municipal level shall be initiated by the PHO in collaboration with CHD FP coordinator
b. Bi-annual project review to be conducted by CHD
c. Annual project review to be called by the NCDPC—CFEH

VI. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.



</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>