Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>10/02/2002</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 157 s.2002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines On The Conduct Of KALAHI Medical And Dental Mission</subject>

<body>
I. RATIONALE

Through Republic Act 8425, The National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC) was created and became operational on July 1, 1998. It serves as the coordinating and advisory body for the implementation of the Social Reform Agenda (SRA). One of the poverty reduction agenda of NAPC is the KALAHI or Kapit Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan that serves as President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo's anchor program for its poverty reduction strategies. This is the primary pro-poor program to address the issues of poverty and a platform for an accelerated, focused, multi-sectoral and systematic anti-poverty strategy of the present administration. KALAHI is envisioned to be the convergence point of all poverty alleviation initiatives of the present administration.

The KALAHI program is currently expanding its coverage whereby selected urban poor and rural poor areas .have been identified by National Anti-poverty Commission (NAPC). The implementation of the program to the additional target sites is already on it initial phase where coordinated participation and mobilization of resources are crucial.

The Department of Health (DOH), as one of the participating agencies, undertakes medical and dental mission during the KALAHI Community Days. In view of the continuing implementation of the KALAHI program, there is a need to develop policies and guidelines regarding KALAHI Medical and Dental missions.

II. GENERAL OBJECTIVES

To strengthen quality health care services to identified KALAHI areas and to ensure proper coordination between National and Local Government Units (LGUs)

III. SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES

1. Facilitate the implementation of Medical and Dental health care services to KALAHI areas.
2. Ensure that integrated promotive, preventive and curative services are provided during KALAHI Community Day.
3. Strengthen a functional two-way referral system.

IV. AREA OF COVERAGE

Urban and Rural KALAHI areas (as determined by the NAPC)

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES

A. Identification, selection and roles/function of lead and corresponding member hospitals.

1. Poor Urban Areas

a. The Department of Health (DOH) through the Office of Undersecretary for Hospitals shall be responsible for the selection of lead and member hospitals to conduct medical and dental missions in urban poor areas, particularly in Metro Manila. A list of DOH hospitals have been selected, as per Department Order No. 316 series of 2001 dated 10 October 2001 (see Annex 1).

b. The Lead hospital shall be responsible for:

1) Assigning a team leader and assistant team leader to supervise and facilitate the conduct of the medical missions for KALAHI Community Day.
2) Ensure availability of medical and support staff.
3) Augment personnel medical staff as needed and requested.

c. On the other hand, Member Hospitals shall assign a permanent and alternate point person for proper coordination for KALAHI Community day. The assigned person must have been oriented to KALAHI protocol.

2. Rural Areas

a. The Center for Health Development-(CHD) shall be responsible for coordinating the conduct of the KALAHI mission outside of Metro Manila in coordination with the Regional Medical Centers; Provincial/District Hospitals and other health facilities.

b. The CHD Regional Director shall be the designated KALAHI person at the regional level and shall be responsible for the i). identification and selection of lead and member hospitals in rural areas ii). coordination of the conduct of medical and dental mission, and iii). to ensure availability of additional support staff.

B. All DOH Hospitals shall serve as the referral center for all KALAHI patients.

C. Local Government Units (LGUs) shall provide additional personnel; other services and chairs! tables arrangements.

D. Medical Social Service (MSS) personnel shall be oriented regarding KALAHI protocols. MSS presence during KALAHI Community Day is a must for screening purposes.

E. Budget for the operating expenses for medical mission shall be provided by the following agencies: NAPC through KALAHI Fund, DOH and Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office (PCSO)

VI. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES

A. Organization of the Medical and Dental Mission

1. Composition

a. DOH Hospitals - Lead Hospitals
b. CHD Regional Director - CHD point person
c. Member Hospitals

2. Functions

a. Attend and participate in the coordinative meeting conducted by NAPC and concerned LGUs;
b. Participate in the preparation of plans for systematic management of medical activity;
c. Inform and advise their member hospitals regarding KALAHI Community Day activities and provision of location map or directional plan of the identified KALAHI site from NAPC;
d. Distribute notice of KALAHI Community Day two weeks before the actual conduct of the activity to give ample time for the preparations and;
e. Set coordinative meeting one week before the actual KALAHI Community Day.

B. Provision of Medical and Dental Services

1. Consultation

The Mission Team shall prioritize elderly, sick people, infants (less than one year old) and pregnant women including people with disability during the consultation.

2. Package of Services

a. General Consultations

• Medical
• Pediatrics
• Obstetrics and Gynecology
• Dental

b. Health Education and Promotion

c. Drugs and Medicine

C. Referral System

1. All DOH retained hospitals are required to provide immediate attention to referred KALAHI patients.

2. Identified patients for referral shall be personally assisted by the Team leader or any designated personnel through the issuance of KALAHI REFERRAL FORM and give proper advise:

3. Patient referred from KALAHI Community Day to DOH retained hospitals for OPD work-up or follow-up are advised to go directly to the Designated KALAHI coordinating office for assistance with his referral slip or any proof that he/she is a qualified KALAHI patient.

4. KALAHI patients shall be referred to receiving hospital's social service for assessment and classification of patient's financial status for funding assistance. (Expenses shall be charged to KALAHI fund)

5. In the absence of ancillary services, the KALAHI patient will be referred to another DOH retained hospital to avail/transfer of needed services using the two-way referral system and KALAHI referral form.

6. All team leaders and focal persons should monitor and notify all referred patients.

7. Referred patients should be properly recorded by the team leaders for submission to the Office of the Health Operation cluster, copy furnished Bureau of Local Health Development (BLHD).

8. For purposes of financial assistance to the KALAHI referral patients, the DOH shall enter into a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with NAPC whereby NAPC will provide funds per admitted and OPD patients for KALAHI referred patients chargeable against the KALAHI Fund under the Presidential Social Fund.

D. Report Preparation

The team leader shall be responsible for the consolidation and submission of reports to the Office of Undersecretary for Hospitals copy furnished Bureau of Local Health Development (BLHD) within two (2) weeks after the conduct of the activity using the following forms:

• Standard KALAHI Reporting Form
• KALAHI Referral Form
• Prescription Form

The above KALAHI forms shall be provided by NAPC.

E. Follow-Up Activity

The Local Health Units of concerned LGUs in coordination with Barangay officials should be responsible for the follow up of patient referred as deemed necessary.

V. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE

This order takes effect immediately.
</body>

<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>