Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue Sta. Cruz Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. 743-8301 locals 1125, 1132. Fax (632) 743-1786; Direct 711-9502, 711-9503
osec@doh.gov.ph

    
<date>03/13/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 87-B s.2002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Adoption of the Merit Promotion Plan (MPP) for the Department of Health, and all its Ofﬁces, Bureaus and Hospitals.</subject>


<body>

Pursuant to CSC Memorandum Circular No. 03, s. 2001 and its previous related issuances, the Department of Health hereby adopts a Merit Promotion Plan for the guidance and implementation of all its Offices, Bureaus and Hospitals on matters related to recruitment of personnel and career development.

I. POLICY DIRECTIONS

1. The Merit Promotion Plan seeks to establish a system that is characterized by strict observance of the merit, fitness and equality principles in the selection of employees for appointment to positions in the career and non-career service in all levels.

2. The Plan creates equal opportunities for employment to all qualified men and women to enter the government service and for career development in the Department.

3. Selection of employees for appointment in the Department of Health in the ﬁrst, second and third level career and non—career positions shall be open to all qualified applicants on the basis of merit, fitness and equality and without discrimination on account of gender, civil status, disability, religion, ethnicity, or political affiliation.

4. All candidates for appointment, except those expressly exempted, shall be screened by the Personnel Selection Board at the level of the appointing authority to assess their relative qualiﬁcations and competence to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position.

5. When a position in the ﬁrst, second or third level becomes vacant, applicants for employment who are competent, qualified and possess appropriate civil service eligibility shall be considered for permanent appointment.

II. DEFINITION OF TERMS

Career Service — positions in the civil service characterized by (1) entrance based on merit and fitness to be determined, as far as practicable, by competitive examinations or based on highly technical qualifications; (2) opportunity for advancement to higher career positions; and (3) security of tenure.

Non—career service — positions expressly declared by law to be in the non-career service; or those whose entrance in the service is characterized by (1) entrance on bases other than those of the usual tests of merit and fitness utilized for the career service; and (2) tenure which is limited to the duration of a particular project for which purpose employment was made.

First Level-positions — shall include clerical, trades and crafts, and custodial service; which invoive sub-professional work in a non-supervisory or supervisory capacity.

Second Level Positions — involve professional, technical and scientific work in a non-supervisory or supervisory capacity up to Division Chief level or its equivalent.

Third Level Positions — generally require either Career Service Executive Eligibility (CSEE) or Career Executive Service Eligibility (CES). This includes the Undersecretary, Assistant Secretary, Bureau Director, Assistant Bureau Director, Regional Director, Assistant Regional Director, Chief of Department Services and other officers of equivalent rank.

Qualiﬁcation Standards — is a statement of the minimum qualiﬁcations for a position which shall include education, experience, training, civil service eligibility, and physical characteristics and personality traits required in the performance of the job. 

System of Ranking Positions (SRP) — is the heirarchical arrangement of positions from highest to lowest, which shall be a guide in determining which position is next-in-rank, taking into consideration the following: 

a. organizational structure;
b. salary grade allocation;
c, classiﬁcation and functional relationship of positions; and
d. geographical location.

Next—in-rank Position— refers to a position which by reason of the heirarchical arrangement of positions in the agency or in the government is determined to be in the nearest degree of relationship to a higher position as contained in the System of Ranking Positions (SRP).

Qualiﬁed Next-in-Rank — refers to an employee appointed on a permanent status to a position next-in-rank to the vacancy as reflected in the SRP approved by the head of agency and who meets the requirements for appointment to the next higher position.

Personnel actions— any action denoting the movement or progress of personnel in the civil service such as original appointment, promotion, transfer, reinstatement, reemployment, detail, reassignment, secondment and demotion.

Promotion —— is the advancement of an employee from one position to another with an increase in duties and responsibilities as authorized by law and usually accompanied by an increase in salary.

Selection — is the systematic method of determining the merit and ﬁtness of a person on the basis of qualifications and ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the positions.

Selection Line—up - is a listing of qualiﬁed and competent applicants for consideration to a vacancy which includes, but not limited to, the comparative information of their education, experience, training, civilservice eligibility, performance rating (if applicable), relevant working accomplishments, physical characteristics, psycho—social attributes, personality traits and potential.

Job Requirements — requisites not limited to the qualification standards of the position, but may include skills, competencies, potential, physical and psycho—social attributes necessary for the successful performance of the duties required of the position.

Hiring Quota —— is the ore-determined ratio of applicants for appointment to ensure that one gender does not fall short of the desired percentage of the selection rate for the other gender in equivalent positions at every level, provided they meet the minimum requirements of the position.

Psycho—social Attributes — refer to the characteristics or traits of a person which involved both psychological and social aspects. Psychological includes the way he/she perceives things, ideas, beliefs and understanding and how he/she acts and relates these things to others and in social situations.

Comparativelv at Par — predetermined reasonable difference or gap between point scores of candidates for appointment established by the Personnel Selection Board.

Superior Qualiﬁcations — shall mean outstanding relevant work accomplishments,educational attainment and training appropriate for the position to be fiiled. It shall include demonstration of exceptional job mastery and potential in major areas of responsibility.

Deep Selection - the process of selecting a candidate for appointment who is not nextwin-rank but possesses superior qualiﬁcations and competence.

Discrimination - is a situation wherein a qualified applicant is not included in the selection line-up and evaluation by the PSB on account of gender, civil status, pregnancy, disability, religion, ethnicity, or political affiliation.

III. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES

Publication of vacancies:

1. Vacant positions marked for filling shall be published in accordance with Republic Act No. 7041 (Publication Law). The published vacant positions shall also be posted in at least three (3) conspicuous places in the agency for at ieast ten (10) calendar days. Other appropriate modes of publication shall be considered.

2. Filling of vacant positions in the agency shall be made after ten (10) calendar days from their publication. The publication of a particular position shall be valid until fiiled up but not to extend beyond six (6) months reckoned from the date the vacant position was published. Vacant positions not ﬁlled within six (6) months should be re—published.

3. The following positions are exempt from the publication requirement:

a. Primarily confidential positions;
b. Positions which are policy-determining;
c. Highly technical positions;
d. Other non-career positions;
e. Third level positions (Career Executive Service); and
f. Positions to be ﬁlled by existing regular employees in the agency in case of reorganization.

Personnel Selection Board (PSB):

1. A Personnel Selection Board for first and second level positions shall be established in each agency preferably with the following composition:

Chairperson - Agency Head or authorized representative from the career service;

Members - Division Chief or the authorized career service representative of the organizational unit where the vacancy is;

- Human Resource Management Officer or the career service employee directly responsible for personnel; and

- Two (2) representatives of the rank—and—file employees, one from the ﬁrst level and one from the second level, who shall both be chosen by the duly accredited employee association in the agency.

In case there is no accredited employee association in the agency, the representatives shall be chosen at large by the employees through a general assembly or other mode of selection to be conducted for the purpose. The candidate who garnered the second highest votes shall automatically be the alternate representative.

The ﬁrst level representative shall participate during the screening of candidates for vacancies in the first level; the second level representative shall participate in the screening of candidates for vacancies in the second level. Both rank and-file representatives shall serve for a period of two (2) years. For continuity of operation, the duly accredited employee association may designate an alternate.

2. For third level positions:

Chairperson — preferably the highest career executive service officer responsible for personnel administration such as Undersecretary or Assistant Secretary

Members - career executive officers to be designated by the head of the agency.

The HRM Unit shall act as the Secretariat for the SP8 of ﬁrst, second and third levels and keep records of its proceedings.

Procedure in the Personnel Selection Board (PSB):

1. All appointments to the first, second and third level positions shall be screened by the PSB, except the following:

a. Substitute appointments due to their short duration and emergency nature. However, should the position be ﬁlled by regular appointment, candidates for the position should be screened and passed upon by the PSB.

b. Appointment to entry laborer positions.

c. Appointment to personal and primarily conﬁdential positions; and

d. Renewal of temporary appointment issued to incumbent Personnel.

2. For vacancies in the first and second levels, all qualiﬁed next—in—rank employees shall be automatically considered candidates for promotion to the next higher position.

3. An employee who is on local or foreign scholarship or training grant or pregnant or on maternity leave may be considered for promotion.

For this purpose, the performance ratings to be considered shall be the rating immediately prior to the scholarship or training grant or maternity leave.

If promoted, the effectivity date of the promotional appointment shall be upon assumption to duty.

4. Promotion within six (6) months prior to compulsory retirement shall not be allowed except as otherwise provided by law.

5. The PSB shall maintain fairness and impartiality in the assessment of candidates for appointment. Towards this end, the PSB may initiate innovative schemes in determining the best and most qualified candidates.

6. The comparative competence and qualiﬁcation of candidates for appointment shall be determined on the basis of :

a. Performance-

For appointment by promotion, the performance rating of the appointee for the last rating period prior to the effectivity of the appointment should be at least very satisfactory.

For appointment by transfer, the performance rating for the last rating period immediately preceding the transfer from the former ofﬁce or agency should be at least very satisfactory.

b. Education and Training- include educational background, successful completion of~training courses accredited by the Civil Service Commission, scholarships, training grants and others which must be relevant to the duties of the position to be ﬁlled.

c. Experience and Outstanding Accomplishments- include occupational history, relevant work experience acquired either from the government or private sector and accomplishments worthy of special commendation.

d. Psycho-social Attributes and Personality Traits— refer to the characteristics or traits of a person which involved both psychological and social aspects. Psychological includes the way he/she perceives things, ideas, beliefs and understanding and how he/she acts and relates these things to others and in social situations.

e. Potential- refers to the capacity and ability of a candidate to assume the duties of the position to be filled and those of
higher or more responsible positions. 

A greater percentage weight shall be allocated to performance.

6. The PSB shall make a systematic assessment of the competence and qualifications of candidates for appointment to the corresponding level of positions. A list of recommended candidates, specifying the top ﬁve ranking candidates whose over-all point scores are comparatively at par shall be submitted from which the appointing authority shall choose the applicant to be appointed.

IV. ISSUANCE OF THE APPOINTMENT

1. The appointing authority shall assess the merits of the PSB’s recommendation for appointment and in the exercise of sound discretion, select, in so far as practicable, from among the top ﬁve ranking applicants deemed most qualiﬁed for appointment to the vacant position.

2. The appointing authority may appoint an applicant who is not next-in rank but possesses superior qualiﬁcation and competence, and has undergone selection process.

3. An employee may be promoted or transferred to a position which is not more than three (3) salary pay or job grades higher than the employee’s present position except in very meritorious cases, such as : if the vacant position is next—in—rank as identified in the System of Ranking Positions (SRP) approved by the Head of Agency, or the lone or entrance position indicated in the agency staffing pattern.

4. A qualiﬁed next-in—rank may present the grievance on the issuance of an appointment under the following conditions:

a. Non-compliance with the selection process.

b. Discrimination on account of gender, civil status, disability, pregnancy , religion, ethnicity or political afﬁliation.

c. Disqualiﬁcation of applicant to a career position for reason of lack of confidence of the appointing authority.

d. Other violations of the Merit Promotion Plan.

V. FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Personnel Selection Boards:

1. Adopt a formal screening procedure and formulate criteria for the evaluation of candidates for appointment, taking into consideration the followng:

a. Reasonable and valid standards and methods of evaluating the competence and qualiﬁcations of all applicants competing for a particular position.

b. Criteria for evaluation of qualifications of applicants for appointment must suit the job requirements of the position.

2. Disseminate screening procedure and criteria for selection of agency officials and employees and interest applicants. Any modification of the procedure and criteria for selection shall likewise be properly disseminated.

3. Prepare a systematic assessment of the competence and qualiﬁcations of candidates for appointment. Evaluate and deliberate en banc the qualifications of those candidates listed in the selection line—up.

4. Maintain records of the deliberations, through the Secretariat, which must be made accessible to interested parties upon written request and for inspection and audit by the CSC.

5. Orient the ofﬁcials and employees in the agency pertaining to policies relative to personnel actions, including the gender and development dimensions of the Merit Promotion Plan.

Human Resource Management Ofﬁcer/In-Charqe of Personnel:

1. Conduct orientation and workshop for all PSB members, including alternate representatives, on the selection/promotion process and CSC policieslon appointments.

2. Conduct of an orientation to ensure awareness and understanding of the Merit Promotion Plan by all personnel.

3. Develop a System of Ranking Positions which will be submitted for approval of the appointing authority, copy furnished the Civil Service Commission concerned for reference purposes.

4. Develop a Plan which shall set forth the number, knowledge and skills of personnel of needed to achieve the organization’s goals, objectives and programs.

5. Develop and maintain an updated qualification database of employees of the agency to include education, training, experience, skills, competencies, and other similar information.

6. Develop a program to fast track the career development of employees with superior qualiﬁcations.

7. Prepare list of candidates aspiring for the vacant positions either from within or outside the agency, including qualiﬁed next-in-rank employees within ﬁfteen (15) days from completion of the preliminary evaluation and submit to PSB for en banc deliberation/evaluation,

8. Post a notice announcing the appointment of an employee in three (3) conspicuous places in the agency a day after the issuance of the appointment for at least ﬁfteen (15) calendar days.

VI. EFFECTIVITY

The Merit Promotion Plan of the Department of Health and subsequent amendments thereto shall take effect immediately after the approval of the Civil Service Commission.

The approved Merit Promotion Plan shall be used as one of the bases for the expeditious approval of appointments, for attestation and accreditation to take ﬁnal action on appointments.

VII. COMMITMENT

I hereby commit to implement and abide by the provisions of this Merit Promotion Plan (MPP). It is understood that the MPP shall be the basis for expeditious approval of appointments.

This Order supersedes Administrative Order No. 54 dated October 15, 2001.


</body>
<sign>ANTONIO S. LOPEZ, MD, MPH</sign>
<signtitle>(Undersecretary of Health)
Officer-in-Charge</signtitle>

APPROVED BY:
<sign> AGNES D. PADILLA</sign>
<signtitle>Director IV
CSC Regional Director</signtitle>