Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Trunkline (632) 743—8301 locals 1125, 1132, Fax Nos. (632) 743-1829/1743—1786

   
<date>02/27/2002</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 82 s., 2002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementation of a New Synchronized Planning and Budgeting System.</subject>


<body>

Through the years, budget are estimated using the incremental basis approach and in most instances budget estimates do not reﬂect programmed objectives, planned activities and target groups. Directional or operational plans are seldom being referred to in the process of ensuring program decisions to become budget decision.

This situation can be remedied by means of synchronization of planning and budgeting so that actual health needs can be properly addressed even in the midst of limited resources.

Section 1. In the new planning and budgeting system, it is envisioned that a systematic approach interrelating planning and budgeting will be effected to come up with estimates of expenditures responsive to the actual health needs of the pepulation being served and more importantly this aims to achieve the following: 

a. Budget estimates that reﬂect program activities, planned program activities and target groups.

b. Strict referral to directional and operational plan, to ensure that program decisions are budget decisions.

c. Come up with reasonable estimates of ﬁnancial requirements for each program/activity based on available resources, thrusts priorities, previous performances and cost analysis thereby making it less difﬁcult to relate program cost with corresponding program performance.

d. Participatory and combination of bottom up and down budgeting which allows for provision of information and guidance from the top and the preparation of the budget from the lowest unit to the highest office.

e. Monitoring performance based on target.

The advantages of this system are :

- Provides a period—to-period basis of comparison to show whether the plan is being realized and if not realized, indicate when changes must be made to obtain current objectives.

- Action is based on study. Operations people and heads of agencies make the plans which they are bound to execute when approved.

- Cooperation is secured in the entire organization. Agency heads and all those who have something to do with the operations are supposed to work together in the formulation of the operational plan best suited for the organization.

- A system of setting priorities is often established especially when resources are limited.

- Coordinated efforts is attained.

- Operations are controlled.

- Waste is prevented when proposed expenditure is analyzed in advance.

- Weaknesses in the organization are revealed.

GENERAL OBJECTIVE. Efﬁcient, effective and sound Financial Management.

SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES

1. To assist management in the development, coordination, implementation and monitoring of capital acquisition, repair and disposition of unserviceable Properties.

2. To promote effective control of prioritized plans, programs and activities of operations.

3. To provide a more efficient internal control at reasonable cost/expenditures.

4. To provide suggestions/recommendedons for decision making.

STRATEGIES

1. Quality Areas. Assessment of infrastructures/amenities, services, office supplies, equipment and drugs and medicines.

2. Quality Assurance Improvement. Services/program manager will identify quality indicators, set higher standards and come up with specific targets of activities against budget targets.

3. Technical Assistance. Development of guidelines for monitoring and evaluation including mobilization and budgeting of funds for the services programs.

4. Information Technology (IT). Mainstreaming the quality of information Technology as concept applied to programs/activities or creating awareness And demand of modern technology.

Section 2. The Planning and Budgeting. For the effective management of resources, the Planning and Budgeting shall be a continuous affair of the Department and its component services/programs/officos/units. It shall consists of three (3) phases. Namely : (1) Operational Planning and Budgeting (2) Work and Financial Planning (Budget Execution), and (3) Performance and Budget Utilization Reviews ( Budget Accountability).

A synchronized planning and budgeting calendar contained in the Attached Annex I shall be adopted DOH—wide, for this purpose.

Section 3. Procedures for Preparing a Budget Proposal.

3.1 The Financial Planning and Monitoring Committee (FPMC). To ensure widest participation and consultation in the preparation of budget proposals, the FPMC at the Central Ofﬁce. Regional and Hospital levels shall be existent for coordination and synchronization of planning and budgeting purposes.

3.1.1 The FPMC shall be responsible for the preparation of budget proposals of the different ofﬁces/hospitals. However, the Planning and Budgeting Committees will still be responsible for proposing their respective offices/units/hospitals which would involve the following:

a. Reviewing the operational plan.

b. Deﬁning the program/project/activity

c. Determining the target for each program/project/activity

d. Costing the program/project/activity using the Program budget system

3.1.2 Each head of the Central Office/CHD/Retained Hospitals still authorized to constitute the membership of the FPMC at their level. A suggested composition of committee at different level is, however, is provided in Annex II (attached).

3.2 Operational Planning and Budgeting

3.2.1 The planning and programming shall commence ﬁfteen (15) months prior to the implementation year with the formulation of an annual operational plan by each office, program, service, unit, center for health development including retained hospital.

3.2.2 Every September of each year, the Executive Committee (EXECOM) shall decide the policy, thrust and priorities that will be used in preparing the operational plan and budget of the succeeding year. This will constitute the Policy Guidelines for Operational Planning.

3.2.3 Specific and more detailed guidelines in the preparation of the Operational Plan, including the Policy Guidelines thus formulated shall be issued by the DOH management through the Health Policy and Planning Bureau (I-IPPB). The HPPB shall coordinate with the National Center for Health Facilities Development (NCHFD) for specific hospital planning guidelines.

3.2.4 The operational plan shall consider the priority projects or activities based on needs, taking into account the levels of current and previous budgets. The existing Medium Term Public Investment Program (MTPDP) and Medium Term Public Investment Program (MTPIP) shall also be used as bases in the formulation of the operational plan.

3.2.5 An operational plan should have the necessary minimum contents, i.e.., activities, objectives, targets, time frame, resources requirements and performance indicators.

3.2.6 The head of ofﬁce, Cluster Heads in the Central Ofﬁce, the Director IV at the Center for Health Development (CHD) level and Chief of Hospital in the case of independent uncorporatized shall review and approve the operational plans of the services, programs, hospitals and other facilities under his supervision.

3.2.7 The CI-ID Health Plans which incorporate the plans of retained hospitals and other health facilities in the CHD, as well as the plans of the different programs and services in the Central Ofﬁce, shall be submitted to the HPPB for consolidation. Operational Plans of Special Hospitals, on the other hand, shall be submitted to the NCHFD for review and evaluation . All these plans shall then be submitted to the Central Ofﬁce Planning and Budget Committee for ﬁnal review and evaluation.

3.2.8 The evaluated operational plans shall be the basis for the budget preparation by the operating units upon issuance of the budget call by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).

3.2.9 The Finance Service shall consolidate the budget proposals of all operating units as prescribed by the budget call. On this basis, it shall prepare the DOH Budget Proposal of succeeding year and present to EXECOM FPMC for internal agency technical review, then the FPMC will in turn submit to the EXECOM for ﬁnal approval.

3.2.10 The approved DOH Budget Proposal shall be submitted by the Secretary of Health to the DBM as prescribed in the budget call.

Section 4. Preparation of the Agency Budget Matrix (ABM) and Cash Ptpgram.

a. ABM and Cash Program of the different offices, clusters, services, programs, units, and regions, including retained hospitals, shall be prepared upon approval of the budget by the Congress, and signed by the President as the General Appropriations Act (GAA).

b. The ABM and Cash Program shall be based on the respective approved reviewed/re—prioritized operational plan of each ofﬁce, cluster, service, region and hospital

c. The ABM consists of the Work Plan and Financial Plan. The Work Plan provides the description of the activity, purpose, output, duration and the targets. This is used in evaluating the performance of the ofﬁce/unit in relation to the fund releases. The Financial Plan presents the monthly ﬁnancial operating requirements of the Work Plan by indicating the speciﬁc object of expenditure that will be incurred to accomplish the target of each activity.

d. Speciﬁc detailed guidelines in the preparation and submission of the ABM and Cash Program shall be issued by the Ofﬁce for Management Services (OMS).

e. The Undersecretaries shall review and approve the ABM and Cash Program of bureaus, services and programs under his/her supervision.

f. The ABM and Cash Program should be submitted to the Finance Service for consolidation, approval by the EXECOM FPMC and submission to the DBM.

Section 5. Performance and Budget Utilization Review. The conduct of Performance and Budget Utilization Reviews has proven to be a very useful venue for identifying and eventually addressing problems in implementation and management of resources. As a policy, the DOH would like to provide a continuum for its institutionalization.

5.1 The Department shall adopt two (2) options in the conduct of performance and resource utilization reviews, is. quarterly and bi-annual reviews. Regular (periodic) performance and budget utilization reviews on a year-round basis shall be conducted for each bureau, service, program, region, unit, including retained hospital by their respective Cluster Heads to make feedback on the relevant issues and recommendations arising from such activity to the DOH management.

5.2 The end-of-year performance and resource utilization review shall be initiated by the EXECOM FPMC.

5.3 The performance indicators set on an annual basis shall be used as the standard for the review of accomplishments. For this purpose, the following indicators may be used :

a. Output Indicators, for quarterly assessment, and
b. Outcome Indicators, which could be the basis for policy formulation.

5.4 As a matter of policy, reasonable budget utilization based on obligations shall not be less than 40% by end of June (midyear) and 90% of released allotment by the end of the year. Review of resource /budget utilization shall cover all resources—provided to the bureau, service, program, unit, region or hospital, whether in cash or in kind, and whether they come from GOP of FAP’s funds or other sources.

Section 6. Deﬁnition of Roles.

6.1 It shall be reaponsibility of each program manager or head of an ofﬁce, bureau, service, unit, region, hospital to orchestrate their planning and budgeting process, with the assistance of their respective Designated Planning and Budget Ofﬁcers.

6.2 On a department-wide basis, the ofﬁces that will take the major lead roles for the efﬁcient implementation of this Order, apart from those aforementioned and those Speciﬁed in Annex I, are as follows:

a. Ofﬁce for Management Service (OMS) — responsible for cash control and monitoring of expenditures;

b. Health Policy and Planning Bureau (HPPB) - in charge of monitoring accomplishments (i.e., physical targets and performance).

c. EXECOM FPMC — takes care of coordination and synchronization of planning and budgeting, dynamic ﬁnancial planning and monitoring and streamlining of internal control systems.

Section 7. Etfectivity . This Order shall take effect immediately.

   
</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>