Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Manila


<date>05/20/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 46-A series 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Guidelines for Establishment of Research Ethics Review System in the Department of Health</subject>


<body> 

I. Background and Rationale

Research is vital to the successful promotion and protection of health and well-being and effective services. At times, research may include risk factors, both in terms of return of investment and for the safety and well-being of the human subjects. For instance, it was found out that use of human subjects in research has lead to irreparable damages and costiy consequences, which could have been avoided if research proposals went through an ethical screening procedure.

Proper management of research is therefore essential to ensure that the public can have confidence and benefit from, quality research in public health Care. Health research management aimed at continuous improvement of systems and development of policies and the reduction of unacceptable variations in research practice in health care. With this, the need to establish a functional research ethics committee in order to safeguard the dignity, rights, safety and well-being of every individual being involved in research activities have been specifically recommended.

In response to this need, the DOH subscribes and commits its support to the Helsinki Declaration, which calls for integrity of the research process as a fundamental requirement and that research must uphold the dignity and rights of a person and not prejudicial to any group or individual in terms of age, gender, race, religion, occupation and health status. Consequently, the Department of Health initiated the organization of the DOH Research Ethics Committee (DREC) provided for under D.O. 255-I s.2002 dated 2 October 2002. The goal is to establish a functional institutional ethics review system for researches within the Department, in accordance with international guidelines and principles as well as cultural and local environment. This guideline prescribes the standards, procedures, responsibilities and monitoring systems that shall be applied to ensure an effective and efficient operationalization of ethics review system in the Department of Health.

II. Objectives

General objective:

To strengthen health research management aimed at establishing institutional ethics review systems and policies in accordance with international laws and principles, relative to research practice in health care.

Specific Objectives:

a. To develop standards/policy guidelines for establishing mechanisms for ethical, quality and relevant researches for ‘the Department of Health
b. To institutionalize a system for research ethics review in the Department, in terms of: i) clearance of proposals, ii) proposal development and submission of proposal for possible funding or endorsement, and iii) monitoring of research implementation

III. Scope and Coverage

The Department of Health shall require all research proposals involving human participation are reviewed independently by the DOH Research Ethics Committee and/or the National Ethics Committee to ensure it meets ethical standards.

IV. Definition of Terms

1. Operational research - research on courses of action that affect the sets of institutions, organizations, services and funding arrangements of the health systems.

2. Biomedical research — research in the fieids of pharmaceuticals, devices, procedures, medicai records and biological samples as well as epidemiological, social and psychological investigations.

3. Participants - patients, users, relatives of the deceased, professional carers or members of the public agreeing to take part in study.

4. Principal investigator - the person designated as taking overall responsibility within the team of researchers for the design, conduct and reporting of the study.

5. Funder(s) — organization(s) providing funding for the study through contracts with the researchers and/or their employers andfor the care organization.

6. Employing organization(s) - the organization(s) employing the principal investigator andlor other researcher; the organization employing the principal investigator will normally hold the contract(s) with the funder(s) of the study.

7. Care organization - the organization(s) responsible for providing care to patients and/or clients participating in the study.

8. Responsible care professional - the doctor, nurse or social worker formally responsibie for the care of the participant while they are taking part in the study.

9. Research ethics committee - committee convened to provide independent advice to participants, researchers, funders, sponsors, employers care organizations and professionals on the extent to which proposals for the study comply with recognized ethical standards.

V. General Guidelines

A. Ethics

1. The dignity, rights, safety and well—being of participants must be the primary consideration in any research study.

a. The Department of Health requires that all research involving patients, service users, care professionals or volunteers, or their organs, tissue or data, be reviewed independently of the research committee to ensure it meets ethical standards.

b. DOH Research Ethics committee was established to protect the interests of the patients; formal approval must be gained for a study before recruitment starts.

c. Informed consent is at the heart of ethical research in health. Ethics committees and all those involved in a research study must ensure that there are appropriate arrangements for obtaining consent.

2. Research funders will need to be satisfied that the proposed research is ethical before allowing it to proceed.

3. The appropriate use and protection of patient data is important. All persons involved in research must be aware of their legal and ethical duties in this respect.

4. It is essential that research reflect the practicalities of care delivery. To that end, participants or their representatives should be involved wherever possible in the design, conduct, and dissemination implementation of research.

5. Research and those pursuing it should respect the diversity of human culture and conditions and not discriminate unnecessariiy by ethnicity, gender, disability, age or sexual orientation in its design, undertaking, or reporting.

6. Some research may involve an element of risk to those participating in it. Risk must always be kept to a minimum and explained clearly to the relevant ethics committees and to participants.

B. Information

1. It is essential that existing sources of information/evidence, especially systematic reviews, be considered carefully prior to undertaking research. Research which duplicates other work unnecessarily or which is not of sufficient quality to contribute something useful to existing knowledge is in itself unethical.

2. Data collected in the course of research must be retained for an appropriate period to allow further analysis by the original or other research teams subject to consent, and to support monitoring of good research practice by regulatory and other authorities.

3. Health care research is conducted for the benefit of patients, users, care professionals and the public in general. There may be occasions when the public good is best served by protecting commercial confidentiality and/or intellectual property.

4. Some advances in health care need to be developed commercially if they are to be made widely available. Successful commercial development often depends upon the protection of intellectual property or commercial confidentiality at critical points in the innovation process.

5. All those conducting health care research should aim to ensure that their findings are available to others through appropriate dissemination.

C. Health and Safety

1. Research may involve the use of potentially dangerous or harmful equipment, substances or organisms. The safety of participants and staff must be given priority at all times, and health and safety regulations must be strictly observed.

2. Research involving medicines shall be regulated under Bureau of Food and Drugs (BFAD). All trials of medicinal products on patients must be notified to BFAD who can offer advice and advisory inspections for such trials and the preparation of products used in them. Similarly, researches involving new medical devices shall be regulated by Bureau of Health Devices and Technology (BHDT).

D. Financing

1. Financial probity and compliance with the law and with the rules laid down by the DBM and COA for the use of public funds are as important in research as in any other area. Organizations employing researchers must be in a position to compensate anyone harmed as a result of accidents or negligence through an ethically and legally approved system of paying them.

E. Quality research culture

A quality research culture is essential for proper governance of health and community wherein excellence is promoted and where there is visible and strong research leadership and expert management. The key'elements of a quality research culture are:

a. Respect for participants’ dignity, rights, safety and well being
b. Valuing the diversity within society
c. Personal and scientific integrity
d. Leadership
e. Honesty
f. Openness
g. Clear and supportive management

VI. Roles and Responsibilities

A. General

1. All those involved in research involving human participation must be aware of and implement the existing guidelines and policies, the ethical principles enshrined in the Declaration of Helsinki and the basic principles relating to ethics, information, health and safety and finance set out in the section V.

2. All those involved in research also have a duty to ensure that they and those they manage are appropriately qualified, both by education and experience, for the role they play in relation to any research.

B. Agreements

1. A complex array of organizations and individuals may be involved in a research study. It is essential that clear agreements thru a Memorandum of Agreement are reached, documented and enacted about how responsibilities for a study are allocated between all involved.

2. It is particularly important that clear and documented agreements are in place for complex studies where there may be:

a. Work on more than one site; and/or
b. Researchers employed by more than one organization; and/or
c. Patients or clients from more than one care organization; and/or
d. More than one funder.

C. Specific Responsibilities

1. Principal investigator and other researchers

a. Develop proposals that are ethical and seeking research ethics committee approval where appropriate
b. Conduct research to the agreed protocol and in accordance with legal requirements and guidance e.g. on consent
c. Ensure participant welfare while in the study
d. Feed back results of research to participants

2. Funder

a. Assure the scientific quality of proposed research
b. Ensure research ethics committee approval is obtained whenever appropriate
c. Ensure arrangements in place for the management and monitoring of research

3. Employing organization

a. Promote a quality research culture
b. Ensure researchers understand and discharge their responsibilities
c. Take responsibility for ensuring the research is properly managed and monitored where agreed with sponsor

4. Care organizationlresponsible care professional

a. Ensure that research using their patients, users, carers or staff meets the standard set in these guidelines
b. Ensure research ethics committee approval obtained for all research
c. Retain responsibility for research participants‘ care

VII. Implementing Mechanisms

A. Organization

1. Philippine National Health Research System

a. The Philippine National Health Research System was established as a mechanism to enhance cooperation between and among organizations to share and pool resources, avoid duplication and deliver better health impact.

b. The DOH through HRD-HPDPB and DOST through the PCHRD agreed to establish one system in managing research in the country, and ethics review through integration between DREC and NEG-PCHRD is one of them.

2. National Ethics Committee

a. Philippine Council for Health Research and Development of the Department of Science and Technology provides leadership and central direction to all health researches in the country. The Council is responsible for establishing ethical guidelines for health researches involving human participation.

b. The National Ethics Committee, organized by the PCHRD — DOST is the over-all policy and arbitration body in terms of ethical review of health research in the country.

c. The National Ethics Committee promotes the establishment of Institutional Ethics Review Committees (lERCs), which is an independent body tasked to review ethical considerations of health research protocols within its jurisdiction.

3. Institutional Ethics Review Committee

a. The IERC in the DOH shall be established thru the DREC. It shall be responsible for the establishing mechanisms for ethical review, ensuring quality and relevant researches in the DOH.

b. The DREC shall recognize and support previously established lERCs within the Department of Health, e.g. RITM, NEC, Hospitals as its partner in a network of promoting ethical research in the Department.

c. Strengthen and complement all existing ethics review committees created within offices, bureaus, centers at the Central Offices, Center for Health Development and attached agencies aligned to the DOH network of ethics review Committees.

B. Function of HRD-HPBPD

Health Research Division of the Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau shall provide support to the operationalization of the DREC, speciﬁcally it shall:

1. Oversee the systems for the ethical clearance of every research proposals coursed through the Department of Health.

2. Provide the administrative support and technical secretariat to the DREC.

3. Monitor the ethical implementation of researches funded through ENHRP, in coordination with the DREC.

C. Specific Procedures for Operationalizing Ethics Review by DREC

1. Scope of Ethical Review

DREC shall review research conducted on human participants that will involve:

a. Physiological, biochemical and or pathological process
b. Physical, chemical and or psychological response to a specific intervention in health subjects or patients.
c. Collection, storage and dissemination of information relating to individuals
d. Determination of consequences of speciﬁc preventive or therapeutic measures for individuals and communities.
e. Research in which environmental factors are manipulated to the extent that individuals are incidentally exposed or put to risk.

2. Roles and Functions of DREC

The DREC shall safeguard the dignity, rights, safety and well being of all actual or potential research participants. As such the DREC is tasked to:

a. Review and evaluate all research proposals that are submitted to the HRD-HPDPB, following pertinent ethical rules and standards
b. Recommend for approval research proposals that were agreed upon as ethically acceptable
c. Formulate systems and procedures on the conduct of the reviewlevaluation of research proposals; agree on systems, procedures and processes for review and evaluation
d. Undertake monitoring and evaluation to ensure that ethical rules and standards are followed and observed 'in the course of the research processlactivity.

3. Membership of DREC

Selection and termination of members for the DREC:

a. The DREC membership shall consists of at least ﬁve members, who will be appointed by the Secretary of Health.
b. Members shall be multidisciplinary and should include representatives form varied sectors or discipline. It should be a mix of scientiﬁc and non- scientiﬁc members.
c. Chairperson, Co-Chairperson and members are appointed bi-annually. Rotation on the Chairmanship can be distributed between the Chairman and Co-Chairman.
d. In order to provide smooth transitions, one-half of members shall be appointed in mid term in order to have varying tenure expiration. Members may be appointed for unlimited number of terms.
e. The DREC shall decide on the replacement procedure in the event of resignation or disqualiﬁcation of any member.
f. The DREC shall appoint permanent advisers who are independent, with expertise on ethical or legal issues. Two non-permanent members shall be appointed by the Committee depending on the nature of the prbposal to be evaluated and the available experts in the ﬁeld of study.

4. Requirement for Members

a. Members should submit comprehensive resume to the Secretariat for documentation purposes.
b. Members are required to preserve conﬁdentiality on information from meeting deliberations, applications, protocol information and related matters.
7. Members are required to attend seminar or training on research ethics or bioethics before re-appointment for the next term or before designation as Chairman or Co-chairman.
8. Members should declare conﬂicting interests and waived his rights in the deliberation and decision—making.

5. The DREC Ofﬁce

a. A permanent ofﬁce shall be provided to house the DREC Secretariat Ofﬁce within the DOH.
b. Standard Operating Procedures, minutes of deliberations, decisions and other pertinent documents should be properly ﬁled at the Secretariat ofﬁce.

6. Schedule of meetings

a. DREC should meet at least once every quarter and in situation where need to convene the Committee arise
b. Minutes of the meetings should be documented and there should be an approval of minutes by Committee members.
c. The applicant, sponsors and lor investigator may be invited to present, clarify or elaborate on speciﬁc issues.
d. The DREC should establish a quorum requirement for reviewing and deciding on an application.

7. Standard Operating Procedures

a. The DREC shall establish standard operating procedures, which is open for public viewing upon request and shall include but is not limited to the following:

- Procedure on Submission of Application for Ethical Clearance
- Procedure on Review of Proposal
- Decision making procedure and communicating the decision
- Procedure on Documentation and Archiving
- Administrative procedures necessary for smooth operationalization of the Committee.

VIII. Effectivity

This Order shall take effect immediately.

 
</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>