Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1033
Tel. Nos. 743-8301 locals 1125, 1132, Fax (632) 743-1829, 743-1786; Direct 711-9502, 711-9503
osec@doh.gov.ph


<date>10/14/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 101, s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: NATIONAL POLICY ON ORAL HEALTH</subject>

<body>

I. Rationale/Background

Sound health begins with good oral health since the process of nourishment starts with the oral cavity. Unfortunately, this line of thought has not been translated into positive action; hence, oral health as it relates to the total health takes the least priority on an individual. The important role of oral health in improving the quality of life and in the socio—economic development of the country is poorly appreciated. Oral diseases have been considered, as non-life threatening, and except for the few elite Filipinos, majority of the population continue to live with their dental problems in ignorance, unmindful of its existence.

There are no less than two hundred dental diseases and conditions in the listing of the World Health Organization, many of which are public health concerns. In the Philippines, the two main oral health problems are dental caries (tooth decay) and periodontal diseases (gum diseases). In the latest DOH survey (National Monitoring and Epidemiological Dental Survey, 1998). 92.4% of the Filipinos suffer from dental caries, While 78% of them suffer from periodbntal disease. The Philippines is currently behind countries in the Western Paciﬁc Region when it comes to oral health.

There is dearth of available data on the prevalence of oral cancer in the Philippines. However, mouth and orcpharynx cancers were found to be a leading cause of cancer deaths in the South East Asian Regional Organization (SEARO) as shown in the cancer registry of The Global Burden of Disease (GBD), WHO, 2000. It was higher than breast, bronchial and lung cancer and ranks 8th globally from all the WHO regions in the Philippines, cancer is 4th among the leading causes of deaths (Philippine Health Statistics, 1925):increased ﬁom 5th rank to 4th in 1975-1990 and 1995 data, respectively. Oral cancer shares the same magnitude raisinga grim impact on victims as it impinges on the food intake.

These oral diseases produce considerable impairment on the quality of life of individuals. Studies revealed that oral diseases could cause functional limitations on the performance of an individual. Aside from the physical pain, psychological discomfort and emotional disturbance, these diseases affect eating habits, social interactions, self-esteem and productivity at work and in school. Good teeth and healthy mouth reflects on the person’s social well being and the concomitant sound and amicable or salutary relationship with his fellowman. Beauty and health are more appreciated. In the economic and social standpoint, every episode of considerable pain in the oral cavity exacts twomman days lost. In terms of productivity, the loss is estimated at 6.5B pesos yearly and the opportunity for learning lost for children is incalculable.

In response to the great task of improving the nation’s oral health, the DOE has fornmlated a comprehensive dental health program in 1993. The program initiated innovations in preventive oral care using the Primary Health Care Approach. Plans and actions are geared towards promotion of good oral health and preventing and controlling oral diseases and conditions so as to attain the highest possible level of oral health.

Oral health as an integral component of total health of the individual and the family should be upgraded cot-complementary with other family health programs. As such, oral health have been integrated under the cluster of Family Health programs along with maternal and child health, nutrition and reproductive health (EO 102, Streamlining the Organization and Functions of the DOH). It is within this whole context that the revision of the DOH oral health policies is pursued.

This Administrative Order outlines the policies and guidelines on oral health, which will help in planning various programs and projects to promote effective, efﬁcient and accessible quality oral health services for the family.

II. Definition of Terms

Oral Health - refers to the state or condition of the structures and tissues of the mouth or oral cavity.

Oral Urgent Treatment - Basic emergency oral care such as extraction of badly decayed and severely periodontally involved teeth under local anesthesia, treatment of post—extraction complications such as dry socket and bleeding, drainage of localized oral abscess, first aid for dento-alveolar trauma and referring complicated cases to the nearest hospital.

Habilitation - Artiﬁcial restoration of prosthesis to restore function and missing tissue parts, in particular, the construction of feeding plates for infants with congenital oral defects (cleft palate/lip).

Rehabilitation - Artificial restoration of prosthesis to oral deformities following oral surgery to restore function and missing tissue and parts for victims of as oral cancer. A scheme to restore speech articulation, mastication and correction of impairment of psychosocial attitudes completes the rehabilitation procedures, prospectively, the area of handicapping dento facial anomaly.

III. Coverage and Scope

The oral health policies and guidelines embodied herein shall apply to all government and non-government health institutions whose functions and activities contribute to the improvement of oral health.

It shall focus on the following services:
a) promotive care
b) preventive care
c) cmativecare
d) habilitative and rehabilitative care

Oral health care shall address the following health problems:
a) dental caries (tooth decay)
b) periodontal diseases (gum diseases)
c) oral cancer and soft tissue lesions

IV. Vision

Empowered and responsible Filipino citizens taking care of their own personal oral health for an enhanced quality of life.

V. Mission

The state shall ensure quality, affordable, accessible and available oral health care delivery.

VI. Goal

Attainment of improved quality of life through promotion of oral health and quality oral health care.

VII. Policy Statements

The National Policy on Oral Health shall be pursued to guarantee the attainment of an improved oral health through a Comprehensive Oral Health Care Program, with priority on the promotion of oral health and adequate prevention and control of oral diseases and conditions, thereby ensuring protection of the rights of every individual with oral health needs.

A. Adherence to Values

Oral health is an integral and indivisihle component of total health. It is both an individual and a collective responsibility of the family, community and the state. Oral health shall be integrated in every lifestage health programs.

B. Leadership

As the national lead agency in the health sector, the DOH is mandated to ensure the promotion and protection of people’s oral health and monitor and evaluate the implementation of national oral health programs. The LGU shall ensure the delivery of basic oral health services as embodied in the Local Government Code of 1991.

C. Priority Target Groups for Oral Health Programs

Basic oral health services shall be made available to the general population particularly the vulnerable and high-risk groups, children (0-6 years old), pregnant women and the elderly, the disadvantaged and marginalized gronps.

D. Standard Oral Health Interventions

Oral health interventions shall be utilized to promote desirable oral practices, prevent and control oral diseases and conditions and provide appropriate treatment, habilitation and rehabilitation.

Cost effective, available, efficient and evidence-based intervention shall be promoted at all levels.

The DOH shall ensure that oral urgent treatment is provided to those requiring such treatment and that such are consistent udth the best dental practice.

The DOH shall ensure the affordable and effective delivery of oral services by promoting and implementing oral health programs with ﬁnancing components.

E. Collaboration and Partnership

The DOH shall ensure an enabling and sustainable environment for collaboration and partnership for oral health among government and none government institutions and organizations.

F. Standard Development

To ensure provision of highest quality oral health care, a national attainable standard shall be developed for manpower, facilities, services, ethical products, dental devices and materials as well as promotion of ethical procedures and practices.

G. Human Resource Development

Human Resource Development shall be geared towards the development of adequate, appropriate, competent and highly motivated health professionals and trained auxiliaries to manage and provide quality oral health care.

H. Information System

Oral health management information system shall be designed, installed and utilized for planning monitoring and evaluation of oral health programs.

I. Monitoring and Evaluation

An effective monitoring, evaluation and surveillance system shall be developed and implemented to ensure collection of accurate and reliable evidence for the rational management of oral health programs and oral diseases and conditions.

J. Research and Development

Research on oral health and other related studies shall be undertaken to improve management, eﬁiciency and effectiveness of oral health strategies.

VIII. Implementing Mechanism

A. National Level

The Family Health Ofﬁce (FHO) under the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC) of the Department of Health will be the lead agency/ofﬁce in the management of oral health. As such it shall take overall responsibility for policy development, standard setting, coordination and integration of all activities. This office shall designate a point person equivalent to Dentist V to ensure that oral health care! services are given importance in terms of technical, logistics and other support systems. It shall convene the technical working group on oral health to assist in the execution of its function.

The Technical Working Group (TWG) On Oral Health, an advisory and recommendatory body created under Department Order No. 51-F, s. 2003 shall continue to regularly review and recommend policies, standards, guidelines, rules, regulations, strategies, program/project design, training and initiatives pertaining to oral health. The group will have the following composition:

Chair: Director/Division Chief of FHO, NCDPC, DOH
Co-chair: Representative ﬁsom the Center for Health Development
Members: Representative ﬁom the Department of Education
Representative from the Philippine Dental Association
Representative from the Academe, UP, CPH
Representative from the Local Government Unit
Representative from the Govemment Hospital
Representative from Other DOH Offices
Secretariat: Child Health and Development Division, FHO

B. Center for Health Development (Regional Level)

The Centers for Health Development (CHDs) in various regions of the country shall maintain the existing dental staff structure of one (1) Dentist IV and one (1) Dentist III within their Technical Divisioanamily Health Cluster and ensure the inclusion of oral health in their priority agenda. The CHD shall oversee the imPlementation of oral health at the LGU levels.

C. Local Government Units

The Local Government Units shall implement the Oral Health Programs in accordance with the National Policy on Oral Health.

The Provincial/City Government shall ensure that oral health care shall be available, accessible and affordable at all local health facilities. They shall provide technical and logistics assistance to the Rural Health Units/Health Centers.

The Municipal Government through the Rural Health Units/Health Centers shall implement an oral health care program consistent with the National Oral Health Program.

D. Support Services

The National Center for Health Promotion (NCHP) shall lead in the development of health information, education, communication, motivation (IECM) and advocacy strategies on oral health in coordination with the Family Health Office. The NCHP shall develop prototype IEC materials for reproduction at LGU levels.

The Health Human Resource Development Bureau (HHRDB) shall provide technical support in planning and development of a training program for oral health professionals and auxiliaries. The I-IHRDB shall also assist the CHDs and LGUs on training needs assessment and procm'ement of human resource development fund from local, national and international agencies.

The Bureau of Health Facilities and Services (BHFS) shall take the lead in the formulation and implementation of standards for licensing and regulation of oral health facilities and services of private schools, industrial/occupational establishments and hospitals and enforcement of policies.

Other support services include the Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau, the National Epidemiology Center, Information Management Services and the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation.

D. Networking

The FHO, NCDPC shall establish necessary linkages with other DOH Services, Department of Education, and Other Government Agencies, Non-Government Organizations, Academe, Professional Groups, Media and the private sectors particularly local and foreign ﬁmding agencies. They shall be partners in advocacy, promotion and provision of oral health services and in the training of oral health care professionals and auxiliaries.

E. Funding

The DOH national and regional health oﬁices (CHDs) shall appropriate in their annual budget suﬁicient allocation for oral health. Generation of funds from other sources shall be carried out at all levels.

Local Government Units are encouraged to appropriate fund in the implementation of their oral health programs.

IX. Repealing Clause

Administrative Orders, Rules and Regulations and other Department issuance inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed, modiﬁed, or amended accordingly.

In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or word of this Order is declared invalid for any reason, the other provisions thereof shall not be affected thereby.

X. Effectivity

This Administrative Order shall take effect upon approval.

   
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD,MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

“Tooth Brushing is Healthy Lifestyle”
</body>