Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Sta. Cruz, Manila
Tel. No.: 7119502/7119503


<date>04/21/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 39 s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Policies on the Nationwide Implementation of the Expanded Program on Immunization</subject>


<body>

I. Rationale

The Philippine Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) was launched in 1976 and has successfully vaccinated and protected millions of children from vaccine—preventable diseases. The rapid acceleration of performance from 1987 onwards highlighted that such achievements are possible under good administration and management backed up by sound policies and clear guidelines.

The Department considered EPI as a priority public health program. While the previous years of EPI were focused on achievement of high immunization coverage, the current thrust now is to sustain this high coverage and focus on the control, elimination and eradication of major childhood diseases. There is a need to update the policies, standards and guidelines to concur with the current goals and immunization practices.

This Administrative Order is issued to prescribe guidelines for the national implementation of EPl and promote a common understanding among key stakeholders and implementers to ensure that quality immunization services are rendered to the eligible-population. 

II. Coverage and Scope 

Immunization shall be an essential health intervention for eligible children and women. This service shall be made available in all health facilities and institutions providing health services for women and children nationwide.

III. Policy Statement

Immunization is a basic right of the child and therefore-no child shall be deprived of this right._T he State regards children as one of the most important assets of the nation and therefore every effort should be exerted to promote their welfare‘and full development of their potentials for a useful and quality life.

IV. Program Goals

A. Maintenance of at least 95% fully immunized child (FIC) coverage
B. Maintenance of Polio Eradication
C. Elimination of Measles
D. Elimination of Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus
E. Control of Diphtheria, Pertussis, Hepatitis B infection, Tuberculous Meningitis and other disseminated forms of TB.

V. General Guidelines and Procedures

A. Target age groups

1. All infants should receive one dose of BCG, three doses of DPT, three doses of OPV and one dose of measles vaccine before their first birthday. Three doses of Hepatitis B vaccine shall also be given if available.

2. All women of childbearing age (15—49 years old) shall receive five doses Of tetanus toxoid for their lifetime protection against tetanus and for prevention of neonatal tetanus among infants. Other age groups that may be determined for supplemental immunization activities

B. Immunization Activities

1. All immunization services rendered by the government health workers must be free of charge as prescribedby law. (Pres. Decree No. 996)

2. Wednesday is designated the national day for immunization in all government health facilities unless otherwise revised by local traditions, customs or regulations and other exceptions.

3. All government hospitals shall likewise provide immunization services at the outpatient department. Eligible children who are hospitalized should be immunized as soon as their general condition improve and at least before discharge from the hospital. Corresponding referral for subsequent doses should be done. Monthly reports of immunization coverage shall be submitted to the nearest City/ Municipal Health Office following guidelines on submission of reports.

4. Measles vaccine should preferably be given on admission in hospital because of the risk of nosocomial measles transmission.

5. Only health workers trained and skilled at giving injections are authorized by the DOH to give immunizations (except OPV which can be given by volunteers during National Immunization Days (NIDs) because it is orally administered and has no overdose and with very little or minor side effects).

6. Infants shall be vaccinated accOrdingto the Immunization Schedule prescribed in the EPI manual. Allthe EPI antigens are safe and effective when administered simultaneously, i.e. during the same immunization session but at different sites. It is NOT recommended, however, to mix different vaccines in One syringe before injection, or using a fluid vaccine for reconstitution of a freeze-dried vaccine.

7. Women of childbearing age (15—49 years-old) shall receive tetanus toxoid according to the fiVe—dose schedule as provided for in the EPI manual.

8. It is justified to open one multi—dose vial for one or two clients if the health worker feels that a client cannot come back for the scheduled immunization session. Parents and caregivers should be informed of the importance of immunization, the vaccine schedule and the need to complete the doses of vaccines.

9. Patients or clients or their guardians shall be informed of any side effects or adverse reactions of any of the EPI vaccines. The DOH shall not directly give monetary compensation for patients that may suffer any adverse reaction due to the administered vaccine. Instead, free treatment and services shall be available in all government hospitals.

10. Adverse events shall be monitored closely. Operational problems must be solved by appropriate legistical support, training and supervision.

11. Follow-up of dropouts and defaulters as well as supplemental immunization activities and. outreach services shall be regularly scheduled to catch up on ”missed” children.

12. Extra efforts must be exerted to vaccmate children particularly in the underserved, hard-to-reach areas and tribal communities.

13. Special immunization strategies shall be conducted to respond to outbreaks of the EPI diseases. Separate guidelines on outbreak response strategies shall be formulated.

C. Contraindications to immunization

1. There are few absolute contraindications to the EPI vaccines. The only absolute contraindications to immunization are:

- DPT vaccine should NOT be given to Children over 5 years of age or to children who have suffered a severe reaction to a previous dose of this vaccine.
- BCG vaccine should not be given to children who have signs and symptoms of AIDS or other immune deficiency diseases or those who are immunosuppressed due to malignant disease, therapy with immunosuppressive agents or irradiation.

2. Both measles vaccines and OPV can be given to children with HIV/AIDS.

3. False contraindications

- Children suffering from malnutrition should be immunized. 
- Low-grade fever, mild respiratory infections and other minor illnesses should not be considered as contraindications to immunization.
- Diarrhea should not be considered a contraindication to OPV.

D. Safe Injection Practices

1. Use only one Sterile syringe and needle per child or mother.

2. Auto—disable (AD) syringes are the equipment of choice for administering vaCcines, both in routine immunization and mass campaigns. At present, however, standard-disposable syringes and needles may continue to be used for mass immunization campaigns nil/rile use of auto-disabled shall be encouraged until government budgets can be increased to cover the additional cost of AD syringes.

3. Disposable syringes and needles shall be discarded after single use in a puncture p1 oof container and shall be disposed of by burying or other impioved means of effective, safe and environmentally acceptable waste disposal.

4. Maximum efforts should be exerted to ensure rigorous procedures for injection safety. Aseptic techniques must be observed during immunization sessions.

E. Open Vial Policy

1. Multi-dose liquid vaccines, such as OPV, DPT, TT, and Hepatitis B from which one or more doses have been removed following standard sterile procedures, may be used in the next immunization sessions for up to a maximum of 4 weeks, provided that all the following conditions are met:

a. the expiry date has not passed; and
b. the vaccine has not been contaminated (aseptic technique has been used to Withdraw all doses); and
c. the vials have been stored under appropriate cold chain conditions, and
d. the vaccine vial septum has not been submerged in water; and
e. the vaccine vial monitor (VVM) on the vial, if attached, has not leached the discard point

2. Freeze-dried vaccines, such as AMV and BCG vaccines should be discarded six (6) hours after reconstitution or at the end of the immunization session, whichever comes sooner. Never ever reconstitute freeze-dried vaccines in anything other than the diluents supplied with them.

3. All opened vials of any vaccine must be diSCarded if sterile procedures have not been fol,lowed or there is evidence of contamination (such as floating particles in the vaccine), or there is just a suspicion that the vaCcine has been contaminated.

4. If the potency of the vaccine is questionable, the vial/s should be thrown away. Do not use these questionable vials for any immunization session. All vacicines should be verified before use to determine if vaccines have had too much heat exposures.

F. Cold Chain Management

1. All vaccine refrigerators or freezers shall be used exclusively for EPI vaccines. No food or drinks shall be stored in these to ensure the optimal temperature for vaccines.

2. Vaccines are stored according to the temperature requirement for each antigen (refer to EPI Manual). Maintain the correct temperature in the refrigerators, freezers, vaccine carriers, cold boxes and transport boxes at all times.

3. Regular temperature monitoring shall be done, charted, and posted on the door of the refrigerator or freezer.

4. A contingency plan for emergency measures should be available and known by all the staff of the facility.

N.B. Details on cold chain management, vaccine handling and storage and other operational guidelines can be found in the EPI manual.

G. Precurement of Vaccines and Other Supplies

1. Vaccine forecasting shall be done every five years, reviewed and adjusted yearly depending upon the calculated requirements for the year.

2. Vaccines shall be procured centrally through the Vaccine Independence Initiative (VII) agreement with UNICEF. or through procurement services with. UNICEF. Central procurement is more cost-efficient and ensures standard specifications for quality vaccines.

3. Procurement Shall follow the procurement schedule to ensure timely delivery of vaccines at the field level.

4. Syringes and needles and other EPI paraphernalia shall be the counterpart of the Local Government Units (LGUs). Supplemental syringes and needles shall be supplied by the DOH—CHDS and shouldtherefore ensure availability of funds.

5. Calculation of requirements for vaccines and other supplies shall follow the formulae in the EPI Manual.

H. Recording and Reporting

1. The health worker providing the vaccination-shall record the given antigen in the. child’s Early Childhood Care and Development Card (ECCD)/ Growth Monitoring Card (GMC)/ Baby Book / Mother and Baby Book, whichever is available.

2. Coverage accomplishment shall be reported as Fully Immunized Child (FIC) which is defined as an infant given one (1) dose of BCG, three (3) doses each of DPT and OPV and one (1) dose of anti-measles vaccine (AMV) before the infant reaches 12 months of age. Hepatitis B vaccine (HBV) and Tetanus toxoid2+ (TT2+) Shall be reported as separate accomplishment reports. Child protected at birth (CPAB) indicatOr shall be used as an indicator when optimum level (80 %+) of TT2+ coverage has been achieved.

3. EPI coverage reports (FIC and by antigen and by dose) shall be reported by all levels. Centers for Health Development (CHDs) shall collate all the reports from the provinces and cities and likewise report to the National level quarterly.

4. Vaccine utilization and stocks reports shall likewise be reported monthly at barangay and municipal level; quarterly at proVincial and city level using a Standard report form. CHDs shall collate provincial and city report and submitted quarterly to the National . level to monitor adequacy and utilization of vaccine supplies at all levels.

I. Surveillance

1. Surveillance of a suspect polio case or APP case, neonatal tetanus and measles cases is an integral part of EPI and a critical component of eradication and elimination activities and should therefore be strengthened and sustained.

2. Cases and deaths due to the seven (7) EPI diseases should be reported by age, sex, and immunization statusfrom the barangay up to the national level following the guidelines of reporting of notifiable diseases.

3. The criteria for diagnosis Of EPI diaeases shall be based on the WHO standard case definitions.

4. Case investigation and reporting shall be done in case of outbreaks and adverse events following immunization (AEFI) and appropriate measures shall be instituted.

5. Vigilance should be Strictly observed for any risk of importing vaccine—preventable diseases, especially for poliovirus. Measures such as vaccination at pOints Of entry should be done if possible when there is a surge of migrants coming from countries where immunization policies are not strictly observed.

VI. Implementation Mechanisms

A. Management

1. The Department of Health (DOH). shall prepare and approve a National and Regional EPI Strategic Plan every five years. The National Plan shall be approved by the National Immunization; Committee (NIC) and subsequently endorsed by the Secretary of Health. The Center for Health Development (Cl-ID) Director shall likewise approve the regional plan. The Local Government Units (LGUs) shall be encouraged to also come up with an approved five-year EPI strategic plan.

2. The National Immunization Committee (NlC) shall continue to be the advisory and recommendatory body for all EPI initiatives. Its composition and responsibilities shall be reviewed regularly.

3. The National EPI team shall be formed and compose committees including but not limited to the following: Planning/ Management, Technical AsSistance, Monitoring . and Evaluation, Social Mobilization, Logistics and Surveillance.

4. The regional EPI team shall likewise be formed 7 and their composition, duties and responsibilities shall alSO be clearly defined based on DOH policies and guidelines.

5. Regional Epidemiology and Surveillance Units(RESUs) shall also be Continuously supported and strengthened as well as the Provincial / City Epidemiology Units. Establishments of these local surveillance units shall also be encouraged.

6. LGUs shall be advised to designate Provincial and city Coordinators or focal persons to coordinate EPI activities in their areas.

B. Supervision and Monitoring

1. There shall be a scheduled quarterly supervisory/ monitoring visits at all levels utilizing supervisory/ monitoring checklists and with corresponding feedback. Follow-up visits shall be programmed based on the findings during the previous visits. - '

2. Monthly accomplishments shall be analyzed-and indicated through graphic presentation (EPI monitoring Chart) at the field health units.

C. Evaluation

1. Annual program reviews shall be conducted at all levels to assess accomplishments.

2. Regular EPI coverage surveys at least every two years shall be done regionwide using the standard WHO coverage surveys

3. A ComprehensiVe Program Review shall be done every three years at national level

VII. Repealing Clause

Any existing provision or issuance found incOnsistent with this order should be repealed

VIII. Effectivity

This order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>