Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


<date>09/12/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 86 s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on Protests on Decisions of the Central Office Bids and Awards Committee (COBAC)</subject>


<body>

Pursuant to Article XVII (Protest Mechanism) of Republic Act. No. 9184, otherwise known as The Government Procurement Reform Act, and its Implementing Rules and Regulations, the following procedure shall be observed in the filing of protests relative to decisions rendered by the Central Office Bids and Awards Committee (COBAC):

1. Decisions of the COBAC with respect to the conduct of bidding may be protested in writing to the Secretary of Health.

2. However, prior to the filing of the Protest, a Motion for Reconsideration, stating clearly therein the grounds relied upon, shall be filed by the party concerned immediately after the issuance of the questioned COBAC Resolution.

3. COBAC shall issue its resolution on the Motion for Reconsideration within two (2) calendar days from receipt thereof.

4. Should the COBAC Resolution deny its Motion for Reconsideration, the party concerned must file the Protest within seven (7) calendar days from receipt of said Resolution.

5. A Protest may be made by filing a verified position paper with the Secretary of Health, accompanied by the payment of a non-refundable protest fee to the COBAC Secretariat. The non-refundable protest fee shall be in an amount equivalent to no less than one percent (1%) of the Approved Budget of the Contract (“ABC").

6. The verified position paper shall contain the following information:

a. The name of bidder;
b. The office address of the bidder;
c. The name of project/contract;
d. The implementing officeIagency or procuring entity;
e. A brief statement of facts;
f. The issue to be resolved; and
g. Such other matters and information pertinent and relevant to the proper resolution of the Protest.

7. The position paper is verified by an affidavit that the affiant has read and understood the contents thereof and that the allegations therein are true and correct of his personal knowledge or based on authentic records. An unverified position paper shall be considered unsigned, produces no legal effect, and results to the outright dismissal of the Protest.

8. The Protest shall be resoIVed strictly on the basis of records of the COBAC. The Secretary of Health shall resolve the Protest within seven (7) calendar days from receipt thereof. Subject to the provisions of existing laws on the authority of the Secretary of Health to approve contracts, his decision on the Protest shall be final.

9. In no case shall any Protest taken from any decision stay: disrupt or delay the bidding process. Provided, however, that the Protest must first be resolved-before any award is made.

10. Court action may be resorted to only after the Protest contemplated in this Order shall have been completed, 119., resolved by the Secretary of Health with finality. The proper regional trial court shall have jurisdiction over final decisions of the Secretary of Health. Court actions shall be governed by Rule 65 of the 1997 Rules of Civil Procedure.

This provision is without prejudice to any law conferring on the Supreme Court the sole jurisdiction to issue temporary restraining orders and injunctions relating to infrastructure projects of the Department of Health.

11. The head of the COBAC Secretariat of the Department of Health concerned shall ensure that the Government Procurement Policy Board (GPPB) shall be furnished a copy of the cases filed in accordance with this Order.

This Order shall take effect after fifteen (15) days from the publication thereof in at least (2) newspapers of general circulation.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, M.D., Msc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 