Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. No. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-95-02, 711-95-03; Telefax No. (632) 743-18-29


<date>02/03/2003</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 15 s. 2003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Conduct of Health Care Financing (HCF) Legal Study Tours under the Integrated Community Health Care Services Project (ICHSP)</subject>


<body>

I. Rationale

The Integrated Community Health Service Project (ICHSP) has facilitated the development of various Health Care Financing schemes in its pilot areas namely: Palawan, South Cotabato, Surigao del Norte, Guimaras and Kalinga during its initial years of implementation. To maximize learning from the experiences of these pilot areas, study tours by other ICHSP replication sites and other local government units (LGUs) are encouraged.

These guidelines are hereby prescribed to ensure the efficient and effective conduct of the study tours and to enable observers to replicate the HCF schemes in their own localities.

II. Coverage

These guidelines shall cover all ICHSP replication sites and all other local government units which are intending to organize local study tours and serve as demonstration sites for HCF.

III. General Guidelines

A. Prioritization of HCF study tours shall be based on the Work and Financial plans of LGUs 

B. Study tour shall only be considered if there is aserious intention to pursue the adoption or implementation of the desired HCF models, such as:

1. National Health Insurance Program

2. Revenue Enhancement/Cost Recovery for Hospital

3. Drug Management SchemesICooperative Pharmacy Model

4. Schemes for Reforming Public Health Budget

C. Study tour participants shall be selected based on the roles they are expected to play in the implementation of a particular HCF scheme. It is, therefore, important to define the role of the proposed participants under the HCF scheme in his/her locality after the tour.

D. Funding for the conduct of study tour activities and other related activities shall be sourced from the funds transferred to the Center for Health Development and from the LGU-ICHSP replications sites.

Host LGUs are expected to take care of estimating, budgeting, and managing the local cost of the Study tour. This includes cost of inland travel (gasoline and rental of van), lunch and snacks of participants, reproduction of learning, and information materials to be provided to the participants, and representation expenses, if warranted.

E. Requesting and host LGUs shall be required to submit appropriate study tour reports

The report shall highlight the lessons learned and how these lessons will be applied in the replication of the scheme/models.

IV. Specific Procedures

A. LGUs who wish to participate in a study tour to observe the operation of an existing HCF scheme in another province should course their request through their Centers for Health Development (CHDs). The request should indicate the following:

- Health Care Financing scheme/initiative to be observed and studied

- Names of the participants and their expected roles in the planned adoption of the scheme

- Suggested host LGU to be visited, the specific points of interest for learning and observation, and the suggested dates of travel

B. Request shall be forwarded to the proposed host LGUs through their CHDs. For NHIP related local study tours, CHD shall coordinate with Regional Health insurance Office (RHIO) and PHIC central office

C. The host LGUs shall conﬁrm their availability and willingness to host the study tour through their CHDs.

Once confirmed, the host LGU shall assign a facilitator from the host LGU. He/she shall be tasked to make all necessary preparations to maximize the learning outcome of the tour. Preparatory activities include, but not limited to the following.

- Briefing sessions to present an overview of the HCF scheme, its historical perspective, rationale, organizational structure and operating systems, implementing mechanisms, monitoring and controi procedures and processes, strengths and weaknesses and other pertinent pointers and tips;

- Site visits to include opportunities for record reviews, interactions with operating staff, satisﬁed clients or members, and observation of daily transactiOns and operations.

- Visits to local points of interest to allow the participants's better appreciation of the social, cultural, political, and population dynamics that could explain or inﬂuence the outcome of the observed HCF scheme.

- Socio-cultural presentation, if deemed essential in appreciating the locale of the scheme and the characteristics of the people who play a key role in the implementation and/or success of the scheme.

D. All participating CHDs are expected to maintain an updated list of HCF schemes/ models and implemented in their respective LGUs that could qualify as study tour site and to share these with other CHDs for information dissemination.

All CHDs are also expected to prepare a summary report on all study tours coordinated and hosted for submission to Central Ofﬁce ICHSP PMO. ICHSP PMO shall forward copy to Bureau of Local Health Development (BLHD);

E. Host LGUs are likewise required to submit a report, summarizing the number of visits administered, the number of participants, the ﬁelds of interest expressed by participants and the lessons learned, if any, on the conduct of the study tour.

VI. Effectivity

This order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MsC</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>