Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Trunkline (632) 743-8301 locals 1125,1132, Telefax # (632) 743-1829/743-1786
e-mail: info@doh.gov.ph; web site: www.doh.gov.ph


<date>06/30/2004</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 157 s. 2004</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: DECLARING THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER OF EVERY YEAR AS THE MASS TREATMENT MONTH FOR FILARIASIS IN ESTABLISHED ENDEMIC AREAS IN THE PHILIPPINES</subject>


<body>

I. Background/Rationale:

Lymphatic Filariasis is a parasitic disease primarily affecting the working age group living in remote and endemic rural areas 1hThe disease is considered as a disease of the poor About 76% of cases live in 4th to 6th class municipalities. It is also the second leading cause of permanent and long-term disability 1n the country today Results of endemic mapping showed that out of the 48 probably—endemic provinces, 36 are already established as endemic.

On the other hand, advances in the ﬁeld of diagnosis and treatment established ﬁlariasis as one the 6 potentially eradicable diseases in the world, as declared by the International Task Force for Disease Eradication. This prompted the Department of Health to spearhead the elimination of ﬁlariasis in 1998, by shifting from control to elimination strategies through Administrative Order No. 25-A, s.1998. In 2000, mass treatment using combination drugs, Diethylcarbamazine Citrate plus Albendazole, was done in 5 selected areas. Mass Drug Administration (MDA) began in 2001 in all known endemic municipalities in 9 provinces, with each municipality implementing at varying months.

To improve the efﬁciency and ensure concerted efforts, the Global Elimination Group recommended that the month of November of each year be designated as “Mass Treatment Month for Filariasis.” Aside from the epidemiological advantage in the control of Filariasis, it would facilitate program monitoring, drug distribution, drug reapplication and program management.

IL Objective

The main objective for declaring November as the Mass Treatment Month for Filariasis is to increase community awareness and participation in the prevention, and elimination of Filariasis in the country.

III. Coverage/Scope:

The Mass Treatment Month for Filariasis will be implemented in all established endemic areas. (Please ﬁnd attached endemic areas)

IV. General Policy:

Mass Drug Administration (MDA) for Lymphatic Filariasis has been going on in endemic areas since year 2000. The Department of Health recognizes the need to improve its implementation by centrally coordinating the timing of all MDAs. As in other operations targeting a wide population base, it is essential that all MDAs undertaken in the country be carried out nearly simultaneously in a single month.

This coordinated schedule will increase public awareness of the health problem, create advocates and activists for program implementation, and increase the efﬁciency of DOH in carrying out support activities to implementing LGUs.

MDAs are to be continued in the LGUs for at least ﬁve years or until otherwise declared ﬁlaria-free by the Department of Health.

V. Implementing Mechanisms:

The central coordinating ofﬁce for Mass Drug Administration for Lymphatic Filariasis is the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC) of the Department of Health. The NCDPC shall be responsible for the following:

1. Provide technical assistance to CHDs, LGUs and other agencies involved in the elimination of ﬁlariasis;

2. Provide program information materials to CI-IDs, LGUs and other partner agencies;

3. Ensure the timely availability of appropriate drugs in adequate numbers for MDA in identiﬁed endemic areas; and,

4. Provide other forms of support, whenever possible, to CHDs and LGUs implementing MDA.

Centers for Health Development (DOH) with provinces endemic for ﬁlariasis shall be responsible for implementing the following:

1. Initiate advocacy activities in the implementation of the “Filariasis Awareness Month”;
2. Provide technical assistance in the implementation of the program at the provincial and municipal levels;
3. Provide technical assistance in the conduct of the Mass Treatment in established endemic areas;
4. Mobilize health partners and other stakeholders to participate in the campaign;
5. Monitor the annual implementation of the MDA program;
6. Conduct other activities to support the ﬁlariasis elimination program; and,
7. Furnish the Department of Health through the NCDPC with the standard, recommended reports pertaining to ﬁlariasis elimination.

Local government units (provinces, cities and municipalities where filariasis is endemic) shall have the following responsibilities:

1. Disseminate to their constituents information on the disease and the annual mass treatment programs;
2. Pass the necessary local resolutions or laws for the annual mass treatment program;
3. Organize health officials and mobilize health facilities and the community for the elimination program;
4. Provide support drugs, such as antipyretics and antihistamines, for mass treatment;
5. Monitor health situation and disease occurrence in its area of jurisdiction; and,
6. Submit pertinent and standardized reports on the mass treatment and ﬁlarial elimination programs to their respective CHD.

VI. Effectivity and Repealing Clause

These Guidelines on the Declaration of November as the Filariasis Awareness Month shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT,MD,MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>