Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila
Telephone No: 743-8301 to 23


<date>07/12/2004</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 162 s. 2004</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Further Amendment to A.O. No. 10-A s. 2001</subject>


<body>

In keeping with the Department of Health’s (DOH) mandate of providing policy guidelines towards the provision of quality health care services to the Filipino people primarily the marginalized poor, implementation arrangements of foreign assisted projects (FAPs) need to be updated. Accordingly, Administrative Order No. 1O-A s. 2001 which spells out related guidelines is hereby further amended as follows:

1. Provision III(A)(2) - The requirement on the establishment of Ad Hoc EXECOM Teams shall be rescinded:

2. Provision III(A)(3) par. 1 - This paragraph which pertains to the roles and responsibilities of the Head of the Cluster for External Affairs shall be fully revised to state:

The head of this Cluster, which at present is an Undersecretary of Health, is designated as the Director of all on—going Foreign Assisted Projects. As such, he/she shall be responsible for making all decisions and taking all actions necessary to promptly and effectively carry out project implementation, including the determination of matters requiring decision by or discussion with higher or peer authorities such as other Undersecretaries, the DOH Execom and the Secretary of Health together with other concerned ofﬁcials and key personnel of the DOH as well as other government agencies. Likewise, he/she shall have direct supervision over the designated Project Manager of DOH FAPs as well as the designated Technical Coordinators of respective projects in the performance/accomplishment of their inherent and assigned roles and responsibilities in project implementation.

3. Provision III(A)(4) - The roles and reSponsibilities of the Bureau of International Health Cooperation (BIHC) shall be fully amended to read:

The head of this Ofﬁce shall be responsible for facilitating the performance of the FAPs management functions of the Unified Project Management Division (UPMD). As such, the BIHC Director shall,

a. ensure the inclusion of the UPMD budgetary and staffing requirements in the BIHC budget and stafﬁng;

b. assess information on progress of project implementation to identify issues that need to be addressed and make appropriate recommendations; and

c. consult with the UPMD on matters that may require actions beyond the Division.

4. Provision III(A)(5) - In addition thereto, the roles and responsibilities of the UPMD particularly the head of this Division is clariﬁed such that he/she shall be the designated Project Manager of all DOH FAPs.

5. Provision III(A)(9) par.1 - This paragraph shall be completely changed to provide:

The designated Project Technical Coordinator (PTC) who will be reporting directly to the head of the Cluster for External Affairs shall provide technical leadership for the project, ensuring the technical soundness of the strategies, initiatives, activities to be carried out to attain Project/Program objectives and ensure sustainability and relevance of project inputs. In order to carry out the herein responsibilities assigned to the designated PTC as well as in obtaining required responses of technical nature, he/she shall be clothed with the authority to:

a. require upon proper notice, the attendance of staff from any DOH unit in meetings he/she sets that involve discussion or resolution of technical issues in FAPs implementation;

b. require, upon proper notice, the submission of written papers, formal positions, or available documents from any DOH ofﬁce that may be required by him/her to make decisions on any technical issue in FAPs implementation;

c. Constitute with staff from any DOH ofﬁce, as necessary, ad—hoc technical committees, technical working groups, task forces or any such bodies organized for a temporary duration in order to provide comprehensive and integrated technical inputs to FAPs implementation; and

d. Substitute his/her own technical judgment for any delayed, missing or inadequate technical input from ofﬁces mandated to be responsible for such matters but had otherwise, deepite preper notice and sufﬁcient opportunity, failed to provide the required technical advice.

Additionally, he/she shall be responsible for:

- Coordination with the technical key players;
- Ensures the consolidation and integration of all project technical inputs;
- Approval of project plans;
- Formulation and review of technical speciﬁcations of project goods, technical design of project infrastructure and the Terms of Reference (TOR) of project consultants;
- Evaluation and acceptance in coordination with the UPMD of the outputs of Project Technical Consultants as to technical soundness and appropriateness in consideration of the approved TOR;
- Institutionalization and sustainability of project strategies, initiatives, interventions;
- Resolving technical issues emanating from Project Review Missions, evaluation, assessment, etc.;
- Ensuring that project support for technical program is properly coordinated with other projects in support of the same program to eliminate redundancy and duplication of project inputs.

All other provisions of Administrative Order No. lO—A s. 2001 as amended which are not inconsistent with the foregoing shall remain in effect.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT,MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>