Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. 743-8301 locals 1125, 1132, Fax (632) 743-1829, 743-1786; Direct 711-9502, 711-9503
osec@doh.gov.ph


<date>07/05/2004</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 160,s. 2004</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: MANAGEMENT OF THE INDIGENCY FUND AT THE TONDO MEDICAL CENTER.</subject>


<body>

Fund amounting to one hundred thousand pesos (P100,000.00) shall be allocated to Tondo Medical Center- to subsidize drugs and medicines, medical supplies, surgical Operations and other special procedures for indigent patients referred by the Office of the Secretary.

This Order is hereby prescribed to institutionalize a more effective system for managing the Indigency Fund, formulate/procedures for a rational fund allocation and utilization and install a regular fund liquidation and replenishment process.

I. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

A. Eligible Beneﬁciaries

The following are eligible for support from the Indigendy Fund:

1. Indigents and/or tinder—privileged persons duly certified by DSWD (Social Case Study);
2. Indigents classified by the Hospital’s Social Service Unit;
3. Direct dependents of such indigent persons; and
4. Indigents endorsed by the Office of the Secretary. .

B. Beneﬁts Coverage

Hospital-related expenditures that qualify for support will include drugs and medicines, laboratory, tests and procedures, X-ray, and other diagnostic procedures, therapeutic procedures, surgical cost, and hospital room and board. 

C. Fund Utilization Requirements

1. Approval

Request for medical assistance from Indigency Fund shall be forwarded to the Office of the Secretary for approval with the following documents:

i. Summary of expenses charged per patient (Patient‘s Account);
ii. Copies of the patient's Brief Case History as prepared by the attending physician (Clinical Abstract);
iii. Certifications of Indigency Status;
iv. Other supporting documents as needed

The Secretary of Health may, whenever necessary, delegate this authority to duly designated senior officers of the Department of Health. List of specimen signatures of other authorized signatories in the absence of the Secretary of Health shall be forwarded to the medical center.

2. Reporting Requirements

The Tondo Medical Center shall submit a copy of Quarterly Liquidation Reports (QLR) duly signed by their Corporate Auditor or COA Representative to the Office of the Secretary- Public Assistance Unit (OSEC-PAU) copy furnished Finance Service—Accounting Division, A monitoring tool/template will be utilized.

3. Fund Allocation

The Public Assistance Unit of the Office of thei Secretary will conduct a quarterly analysis: of Indigency Fund utilization. Allocation and distribution of Indigency Fund to Tondo Medical Center will be based on Utilization Report.

II. SPECIFIC PROCEDURES

The implementing mechanism will consist of a chain of activities that shall be initiated at the Public Assistance Unit of the Office of the Secretary of Health.

The specific procedures of the implementing mechanism are as follows:

1. Indigent clients seeking assistance for medical assistance shall be interviewed and screened at the Public Assistance Unit of the Office of the Secretary and will be recommended for approval to the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative;

2. Approved request for medical assistance shall be referred to the Office of the Medical Center Chief for proper action;

3. The attending physician shall prepare brief patient case history, clinical abstract and prescribe course of treatment;

4. The Tondo Medical Center’s accounting/finance department shall prepare the Quarterly Utilization Reports (QURs) reﬂecting the charges made for the period against the indigency fund, attested by the Medical Center Chief and verified by the Commission on Audit (COA) Resident Auditor;

5. A copy of the quarterly fund utilizatlop/llqmdation report shall be forwarded :to the Public Assistance Unit of the Office of the Secretary for analysis copy furnish Finance Servrce-Accountmg Division;

6. The Public Assistance unit shall conduct a quarterly monitoring and evaluation: and annual fund utilization review relative to the Indigency Fund.

III. REPEALING CLAUSE

The provision of existing administrative issuance, guidelines or regulations inconsistent with this Order are hereby repealed, superceded or modified as required.

IV. EFFECTIVTY CLAUSE

This Administiative Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT,MD,MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>