Republic of the Philippines
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
Ofﬁce of the Secretary
San Lazaro Compound, Sta. Cruz, Manila
Tel# 743-83-01


<date>01/11/2005</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2005-0003</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Issuance of Certificate of Product Registration for Water Purification Equipment and Device</subject>


<body>

I. RATIONALE

Pursuant to the provisions 'of the Revised Implementing Rules and Regulations of Chapter II — “Water Supply’ of the Sanitation Code of the Philippines (P D 856), the Department of Health through the Bureau of Health Devices and Technology 13 hereby mandated to implement these guidelines on the issuance of Certiﬁcate of Product Registration for water puriﬁcation equipment, and devices including household water ﬁlters and water puriﬁers.

II. SCOPE/COVERAGE

These guidelines shall apply to local manufacturers, importers and distributors, including establishments that repackage and re-label water puriﬁcation equipment, and devices including household water ﬁlters and water puriﬁers for the purpose of selling or commercial distribution in the local market.

III. DEFINITION OF TERMS:

As used in this Set of guidelines, the terms below shall be deﬁned as follows:

- APPLICANT — refers toa local or foreign establishment that seeks to include its health related device in the BHDT list of registered water puriﬁcation devices.

- BHDT — refers to the Bureau of Health Devices and Technology (BHDT) of the Department of Health.

- CERTIFICATE OF PRODUCT REGISTRATION —_ a certiﬁcation issued by the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representative, the Director of BHDT, attesting the claims. of the manufacturer, importer or distributor on the product. Claims can be found in the label and the manual of the product

- DISTRIBUTOR — refers to any person or establishment to whom or where a water puriﬁcation device product is delivered or sold for purposes of distribution in commerce, except that such term does not include a manufacturer or retailer of such product.

- HRDRD - refers to the Health Related Device Regulation Division of the Bureau of Health Devices and-Technology of the Department of Health.

- IMPORTER — refers to any person or business establishment that receives Water puriﬁcation devices ﬁom foreign manufacturers for the purpose of offering them for sale and/or distribution in the Philippines.

- LABELING —- diSplay of written, printed or graphic matter, printed or graphic matter on any water puriﬁcation device product, its immediate container, tag, literature or other suitable material afﬁxed thereto for the purpose of giving information as to the identity, components, attributes, directions for use, speciﬁcations and such other information as may be required by law or regulations.

- MANUFACTURER refers to any person who manufactures, assembles or processes water puriﬁcation devices, except that if such products are manufactured, assembles or processed for another person who attaches his own brand name to the product, the latter shall be deemed the manufacturer. In case of imported products, the manufacturer’s representative or, in his absence, the importer shall be deemed the manufacturer.

- WATER SYSTEM COMPONENTS —— materials or products that come in contact with drinking water, drinking water treatment chemicals, or both which include, but are not limited to, process media (carbon, sand, etc.), protective materials (coatings, linings, liners, etc.), joining and sealing materials (solvent cement, welding materials, gaskets, etc), devices  used in. storing and dispensing water (tanks, water dispenser, etc) and devices used in treatment/transmission/distribution systems (ﬁttings, valves, chlorinators, separation members, etc.)

- WATER PURIFICATION DEVICES — equipment, apparatus, device or gadget whose purpose is to purify or treat water, either for household, commercial or other-uses.

- WATER PURIFICATION SYSTEM — combination of water puriﬁcation devices and water system components intended to purify or treat water for drinking purposes.

IV. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

A. All local manufacturers, importers and distributors, including establishments that repackage and re—label water puriﬁcation equipment, and devices including household water ﬁlters and water puriﬁers shall apply for Certiﬁcate of Product Registration to the Department of Health through the Bureau of Health Devices and Technology that fall under any of the following conditions:

1. Water puriﬁcation devices and water puriﬁcation system that are already in the market prior to the publication of this guideline.

2. When introducing a device or a system into commercial distribution for the ﬁrst time.

3. When proposing an additional use for the device that is already in the market. Additional use is indicated in the new label/labeling of the device.

4. When there is a change or modiﬁcation of a device or a system the manufacturer already markets, if that change could signiﬁcantly affect its safety or effectiveness.

B. The following shall be exempted from registration requirements:

1. Manufacturers that sell unﬁnished devices to another ﬁrm for further processing, including components to be used in the assembling of devices by other ﬁrms. However, if the components are to be sold directly to end users as replacement parts, the manufacturer of such components shall apply for a CPR.

2. Manufacturers of water puriﬁcation devices that are not being marketed or commercially distributed in the Philippines.

3. Distributors of locally manufactured water puriﬁcation devices that have already been issued a BHDT CPR for their product.

4. Importers of water puriﬁcation devices whose foreign manufacturer or his representative in the Philippines has already been issued a BHDT Certiﬁcate of Product Registration.

V. POLICIES AND PROCEDURE FOR CERTIFICATE OF PRODUCT REGISTRATION

A. Documentary Requirements

1. Properly ﬁlled-up application form

2. Copy of DTI Certiﬁcate of Registration] SEC Articles of Incorporation (to present original)

3. Copy of Mayor’s Permit (to present original)

4. Cepy of the Operational Manual (to present the original copy)

5. Layout of Devices

6. Result of Analysis (ROA) of the Device/Product Water done by a Laboratory accredited by Department of Health (DOH) for all claims listed in the label and manual

B. Speciﬁc Procedures

1. Applicant shall submit properly ﬁlled up application form per device/system to HRDRD Secretariat.

2. The Secretariat shall receive. and indicate the time and date the documents were received.

3. The Secretariat shall issue the Order of Payment for the application fee. The applicant goes to the Cashier Section, DOH for payment, then submits photocopy of the receipt to the Secretariat for further processing of the application.

4. The Secretariat forwards the documents to the BHDT-HRDRD evaluator for review. If there are no deﬁciencies an ocular inspection shall be undertaken. He/She then, shall submit a report to the HRDRD Division Chief, who shall recommend approval/disapproval of the application

4.1 The product water which shall be used for drinking purposes shall pass the Philippine National Standards for Drinking Water and other applicable standards, if applicable.

4.2 Completeness of documents and Results of Laboratory Analysis (ROLA) will be the basis of the CPR issuance.

4.3 Applicants ‘whose documents have deﬁciencies shall be notiﬁed and shall be given one-month abeyance period to correct the deﬁciencies, otherwise, the application shall be discarded and destroyed.

4.4 Issued CPR shall not be used for advertisement purposes by the manufacturer, distributor and importer of the device.

4.5 A failed ROLA will be a major ground for non-issuance of the CPR.

C. Validity/Expiration

The Certiﬁcate of Product Registration to be issued by the BHDT Director shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of issuance.

D. Fees And Charges

All fees shall be payable to the Department of Health in accordance with the following schedule

1. One Thousand Pesos (PHP 1,000.00) per system

2. Five Hundred Pesos (PHP 500.00) per device

3. Fees and charges are subject to change as may be deemed necessary

E. Renewal Of Certiﬁcate Of Product Registration

1. Filing for renewal of Certiﬁcate of Product Registration shall be made at least two (2) months before the expiration date.

2. A penalty of ﬁfty percent (50%) of the registration fee shall be paid by the applicant for late renewal of CPR.

F. Grounds For Disapproval/Revocation Of CPR

The following shall be grounds for disapproval/revocation of CPR.

1. Material misrepresentation or concealment of signiﬁcant data or information about the product sought for certiﬁcation.

2. Submission of falsiﬁed documents by the applicant.

3. Failure of device after monitoring.

G. Investigation Of Charges And Complaints

1. The Health Related Devices Regulation Division (HRDRD) of BHDT shall reconnnend imposition of sanctions. The decision shall be issued by the BHDT Director

2. The party affected by the decision may ﬁle a motion for reconsideration with the Ofﬁce of the Secretary of Health within ﬁfteen (15) days from receipt thereof. The BHDT shall issue the appmpriate order therefore.

3. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision on its original appeal within ﬁfteen (15) days from receipt thereof to the Secretary of Health. The decision of the Secretary of Health shall be ﬁnal and executory.

VI. REPEALING CLAUSE

All administrative orders, rules and regulations and administrative issuances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this guideline are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

VII. EFFECTIVITY

This order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after its publication in an ofﬁcial gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, M.D.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>