Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health 248-4
OFFlCE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. No. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-95-02. 711-95-03; Telefax No. (632) 743-18-29

      
<date>05/30/2005</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2005-0013</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Roles and Regansibilities of the Eight (8) Sanitaria Hospitals</subject>


<body>

I. BACKGROUND RATIONALE

With the unprecedented drop of the prevalence rate of leprosy from 2.4 leprosy cases per 10,000 population in 1992 to 0.57 leprosy cases per 10,000 population in 2000, the sanitarium, as an integral component of the Department of Health (DOH) hospital systems, need to readjust its targets and priorities. The aforementioned success, among others, is largely attributed to the application of Multi Drug Therapy (MDT).

Since 1994, all Sanitaria have been providing general service care not only to emergency cases and out-patient treatment but also in—patient care of the general public in their respective catchment areas. Even with decreasing admission of leprosy cases, this dual role of providing both general service care and custodial care has put a drain in its limited resources both financial and human.

Because of this, the DOH underwent series of succession plans and proposed the Sanitaria Conversion Plan as part of the DOH Hospital Upgrading Plan. Relative to this, the DOH Central Office consulted the various Centers for, Health Development (CHD) Directors, Chiefs of Hospitals and Medical Centers of affected areas. Therefore, cognizant to this, Department Order No. 72,5. 1994 is hereby amended to expand their legal mandates.

II. GENERAL OBJECTIVE

To expand the legal mandate of the eight (8) Sanitaria nationwide

III. SCOPE/ COVERAGE

This Administrative Order shall cover all the eight (8) Sanitaria under the Department of Health

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS

Sanitarium — is an institution established to make available hospital services specifically for Hansenites

Multi Drug Therapy (MDT) —- this is the established treatment for cases of leprosy

V. OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES

A. Expanded Legal Mandates

Each Sanitaria shall maintain a leprosy unit and coordinate with their respective Centers for Health Development and the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control — Infectious Disease Office.

B. Roles and Responsibilities

SANITARIA

1. Responsible for the training of health workers in their respective catchment areas regarding updates, trainings, re-training on leprosy control program. 

2. Integrate the Multiple Drug Therapy (MDT) services fully with the existing general health care services.

3. Serve as the referral center for the management of complications, patient and family counseling and community education.

4. Conduct community dialogues about leprosy with the National Leprosy Control Program.

5. Provide for emergency, out-patient and in-patient treatment / care for the general population in its immediate catchment area. Each Sanitarium shall upgrade its emergency room, shall provide for out—patient department and convert existing buildings as wards to accommodate in—patients for general service care.

6. Make available initially the following five major Service Departments namely: Medical, Surgical, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Family Medicine and Pediatrics.

National Center for Health Facility Development (NCHFD) / National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC)- Infectious Disease Office

1. Conduct monitoring and evaluation of all Sanitaria

2. Provide technical assistance on the Sanitaria Development Plan

VI. REPEALING CLAUSE

All issuances which are inconsistent with the provisions of this order are hereby repealed/amended. All other provisions under Department Order no. 72 s. 1994, which are not inconsistent with this order still stand in effect.

Vll. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>MANUEL M. DAYRIT, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>