Republic ofthe Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Building 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue
Sta. Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-9502, 711-9503 and 781-4362; Telefax No. (632) 743-1825

  
<date>01/02/2007</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006-0007-A</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Supplementary Guidelines to AO No. 2006-0007, to Cover Guidelines for Establishment of Governing Boards for Selected Department of Health (DOH) Hospitals</subject>


<body>

Hospitals are complex institutions to manage. Compared to any other service enterprise hospitals do not generate identical outputs that are produced in an assembly line process. Several reforms have been implemented in hospital of which fiscal autonomy is one of them. With the FOURmula One for Health the Department of Health intends further to implement critical reform initiatives. Another critical component to hospital organization and management is on hospital governance. Hospital governance through the creation of Governing Board, intends to further improve the management and implementation of major hospital reforms geared towards improving quality eﬁiciency and effectiveness of health care delivery services.

Pursuant to Administrative Order No. 2006—0007 re: “Guidelines in Establishing Governing Boards for Augmenting Management Capacity of Public Hospitals”: the Department of Health (DOH) Hospitals are mandated to have Governing Boards for either an individual hospital or a Governing Board for a cluster of hospitals by geographical location. This Order sets the criteria. and guidelines for establishing governing boards for selected DOH Hospitals.

I. SELECTION OF PRIORITY HOSPITALS TO ESTABLISH GOVERNING
BOARDS

A. Criteria for Selection

The following criteria were formatted to ensure the proper establishment of Governing Boards in selected DOH hospitals :

1. Systems in place. Well managed hospital based on assessment of the following:

a.) Quality patient care - Implementation of Clinical Practice Guidelines or Hospital Treatment Protocols; improvement of clinical performance indicators such as decreasing nosocomial infection rate; death rate; increasing recovery rate.

b) Proper patient classification — Adherence to Administrative Order 51—a. s. 2001 ” Implementing Rules and Guidelines in the Classiﬁcation of Patients in Government Hospitals ”

c) Patient Satisfaction — Satisfaction rate of at least seventy percent (70%) based on survey forms and at least eighty percent (80%) of complaints resolved

d) Financial Management — Implementation of proper costing and rate—setting for all hospital procedures and services rendered

e) Referral System — Active implementation of hospital networking and two—way patient referral system

f) Compliance to Standards and Policies a Implementation of Hospital standard operating procedures (SOPs); Compliance to Republic Act No. 9184 “Procurement Act"; Functional Computer Based Hospital Information System

g) Training and Research +— High passing rate in Specialty Board Examinations of trained residents; With good number of published researches

2. Facilities - Appropriate and well-maintained infrastructure and availability of ancillary services.

3. Financing — Must be Philhealth accredited as Tertiary Care with high enrolment of Philhealth members in the hospital catchment area and high percentage of Philhealth reimbursement.

4. Marketability of Hospital Services — Availability of Hospital Specialized Services needed in the area which attracts pay patients; Availability and Adequacy of trained and experienced Medical Specialists; Availability of state of the art medical equipment for diagnostic services which are at par with private health care facilities.

5. Strong Leadership of Management # Pursues its mission and vision towards the realization of the Health Sector Reform Agenda, FOURmula l for Health, and the Philippine Hospital Development Plan.

B. List of Priority Hospitals to establish Individual Hospital Governing Board

Based on the selection criteria, the following DOH hospitals garnered the highest number of points. These are the hospitals identiﬁed to create the hospital Governing Board in preparation for Corporate Re-structuring:

l. Quirino Memorial Medical Center
2. Mariano Marcos Memorial Medical Center
3. Davao Medical Center
4. WesternVisayas Medical Center
5. Davao Regional Hospital
6. Ilocos Training and Regional Medical Center
7. Northern Mindanao Medical Center
8. Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center
9. Baguio General Hospital and Medical Center
10. Zamboanga City Medical Center

C. The Powers, Composition and Functions of the Governing Board shall be implemented pursuant to the provisions of Administrative Order No. 2006-0007, dated April 28, 2006.

D. Implementation Phase

1. In organizing the ﬁrst batch of hospital governing board members, a selection committee will be formed. DOH hospitals are currently operating as a line agency under the DOH, the selection committee will be composed of members organized by the Secretary of Health.

The immediate task of the selection committee is to formulate the selection criteria for governing board members. Integrity, intelligence, interest, proven decisiveness and dedication should be given weight in the selection process.

2. Incentives and benchmarks to ensure appropriate establishment of Governing Boards shall be set by the DOH correlating with the Performance Based Budgeting for DOH Hospitals.

3. FICO in coordination with NCHFD will also determine the need to create a Governing Board for a cluster of hospitals by geographical location.

II. REPEALING CLAUSE

All legal provisions consistent with this Administrative Order, shall remain in effect and in full force.

III. EFFECTIVITY

This order shall take effect immediately.

  
</body>
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>