Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
Bldg. No. 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, Manila 1003
Tel. Nos. (632) 711-95—02, 711-95-03; Telefax No. (632) 743-18-29


<date>01/23/2006</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2006-0002</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Establishment of the Continuing Quality Improvement (CQI) Program and Committee in DOH Hospitals.</subject>


<body>

I. RATIONALE

Health service delivery has been changing over the past years. The evolving science of medicine manifested in the discoveries of new diagnostic and treatment modalities and changes in patient expectation in the face of limited resources has placed a strain on the capability of health care providers to provide the best care possible. This often results to failure in delivery of effective health services resulting to increased litigation in health care and poor health outcomes. Because of this the health sector has adopted the quality improvement experience of the manufacturing industry in providing quality services.

Since its inception, quality assurance (QA) mechanisms have changed, with the prescriptive mechanisms evolving into more facility—oriented systems. At present, continuing quality improvement (CQI) has become more accepted and can be described as a process through which the level of quality is deﬁned, pursued, achieved and continuously improved through the establishment of formal mechanisms / systems and structure within the organization. Continuous Quality Improvement describes the overall effort of the hospital organization to achieve the most effective care with the available resources and without compromising quality. 

Congruent with the requirements ,of hospital licensure. and the intent of Department Order Nos. 310-} s. 2001 and l72-C 3.2003 on “The Creation of the DOH Steering Committee and Technical Working Group for the Establishment of CQI Program for the Health Regulation Cluster and DOH Hospitals and its amendment respectively, to consistently deliver and continuously improve the quality of health care to our people, there is a need to institutionalize and establish the Continuing Quality Improvement (CQI) Program and Committee in all DOH hospitals. This is also in concurrence with the thrust of PHIC Benchbook which states that “ Achieving total quality is the goal of continuous performance improvement. This means continuously upgrading performance targets from previously accepted minimal standards, a challenge which demands a management philosophy advocating continuous quality improvement in all levels of the organization, and the strategies operationalizing such philosophy.

CQI is a strategic approach to providing the best health care possible. It is a preventive strategy that uses constant innovation to improve work processes and systems by reducing time —- consuming, low — value activities. Time that was once spent on rework and crisis management is now spent on planning, coordination and control. These. includes different perspective of quality: 1) clinical quality ( providers) refers to the degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current professional knowledge; 2) service quality (customers) the emphasis on service quality has been most apparent since the growth of manage care. There is perceived restriction to a patient’s freedom of choice; 3) cultural quality (administration) refers to the recent movement in health care called quality management (TQM) or continuous quality improvement. This is the effort to improve the level of performance across an entire organization to achieve higher levels of customer satisfaction.

Customers are categorized as external and internal. Internal — (working within the organization) co-workers, patients, consumers, staff and others. External (working outside organization) families of patient, customers, suppliers, government agencies, community agencies.

In order to continuously improve the quality of health care services in all of the DOH hospitals, the implementation of the Continuing Quality Improvement (CQI) Program in the DOH Hospitals is essential.

II. POLICY STATEMENTS

A. To protect and promote the health of the people by ensuring the rights to quality health service appropriate to the levels of care through the regulation of hospitals and other health facilities.

B. Health facilities need to be strengthened to comply with licensing and accreditation requirements.

III. GOALS & OBJECTIVES:

To ensure that all consumers receive the highest quality and most cost effective health services available through the development and maintenance of a qualiﬁed, diverse and accessible multidisciplinary network, care and service organizations.

Objectives

1. To ensure establishment and institutionalization of CQI program in managing quality in health care in all DOI-I retained hospitals.

2. To provide training and other forms of technical assistance relative to quality improvement to all hospital staff.

IV. SCOPE

This Order shall serve as guidelines in setting up CQI program in managing quality in health care in all DOH retained hospitals. This shall also include the establishment of enabling conditions such as training and other forms of technical assistance by concerned DOH offices and other government agencies.

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES

In the CQI Program implementation, a HOSpital CQI Committee shall be organized. This committee shall serve as the advisory body to the Chief of the hospital. The CQI Committee, in partnership with consumers and providers, will facilitate the development and successful operation of the Quality Improvement Committee. This serves as the policy- making entity with regard to hospital quality management.

A. Framework

Organization performance is maintained and continuously improved by the committee through the use of an ongoing cycle of monitoring performance and feedback mechanism to improve organizational inputs (outcome). In defining the framework, it must be a structure that encompasses quality improvement methods and tools to support strategic planning align? with the vision, mission and objectives of Quality Improvement (QI) methods.

B. Principles

The principles of CQI guide us through the process of improving our service to our customers.

1. All work is service to others — our customers. They may be consumers, staff members from other departments, family of consumers, the courts or the general public. To meet the customer needs, know who the customers are. Ask them, don’t wait for complaints, be proactive in determining how best to relate to the customers.

2. Quality is achieved by identifying and consistently meeting the needs, requirements and expectations of our customers. Getting in the habit of consulting with our customers will help us to meet their needs. Finding out what they want and asking what we can do to help will result in quality work.

3. All work is part of a process that serves customers, and is organized around the needs ﬁrst. One process we complete is the discharge of patients/ consumers. These customers should be consulted early on in the discharge planning process in order to meet their needs and expectations.

4. Quality service is the result of teamwork, organized around a process. In order to ensure a smooth ﬂow, we need to integrate our work and perceive the process as cutting across departments. The creation of cross functional teams results in people who not only talk to one another but begin to understand how the process should “flow”. A team who understands the flow of the process can create positive change.

5. Part of the daily work is to improve processes by reducing variation. Inconsistencies (variations) in your daily work lower quality and raised costs. Look for the inconsistencies in your work process in the following:

Machines and equipment, materials and supplies, methods and procedures, measurements and calibrations and people. Your task is to identify inconsistencies in your work and some of forms of variation are simply part of the work process and they are unlikely to be modified.

6. Use of data and measurement tools is key to improving processes and outcomes. CQI uses a scientific approach to examining a problem. The collection and analysis of meaningful data creates a fact— based understanding of processes. This new knowledge allows teams to design effective and lasting improvements based on facts.

7. Management commitment to quality principles and practices is essential. Management must facilitate a culture empowerment, collaboration and organization within a person, continually looking at what he or she is doing to see if it can be done better, in a different, more creative way to meet needs. 

C. Components

The core components of the CQI Program should be the following:

1. Leadership and Management

Leadership and management is a way of promoting a culture of self-responsibility and accountability, openness and desire to change, and commitment to the patients and staff welfare. This can be achieved by continuing professional training and development. With the management’s commitment to professional development, the staff will feel valued, they will see management as committed to their professional growth and they will be able to participate actively in policy
discussion and implementation of the CQI

2. Quality Improvement

Quality improvement is a means of addressing quality issues that involve looking at what is currently being done with the intention of improving it. The idea is to raise the quality of health care and services no matter how good it may already be. The objective therefore is not just to meet predeﬁned standards but rather to exceed them and raise them to a level of excellence.

3. Risk Management

Risk is deﬁned as the likelihood of the occurrence of an event that can cause damage to the patient, doctor or organization. Risk management is the systematic process of identifying, evaluating and addressing potential and actual risks. This can be achieved by developing an actual program that can prevent, control and minimize such risks. In the implementation of this program, it is important to promote a ‘fair blame’ and ‘just environment’.

4. System of Reporting and Documentation

Records and reports are legal documents which are confidential and should contain complete and accurate set of information to facilitate optimal patient care and allow for evaluation of the care provided.

5. Resource Management

Resource management is a way of making sure that resources are available for CQI activities. This may involve generation or re—allocation- of resources based on prioritization.

In implementing these core components, the management must consider the internal and external factors needed to be addressed for smooth implementation. External: considers the hospital’s external environmental issues such as examining community needs, health care reforms, accountability, competitiveness, market forces and regulations. Internal: considers the hospital’s internal characteristics and functions. It involves leadership, management of human resources, information and improving organization performance.

The hospital CQI is about encouraging every member of the staff recognize, accept and practice their respective role in providing quality health care and service with a sense of responsibility and accountability. It is about continuously improving the quality of health care and services through a series of planned activities that consist of evaluation, intervention and monitoring and promoting change. It is about teamwork and management of resources very well to provide high quality health care and service. It is about promoting a culture of accountability and openness to change.

It is not promoting a rigid approach to the delivery of health care and services. It is not promoting competition among staff and personnel. It is not promoting an environment of reward and punishment.

VI. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISM

A. Structure

1. Composition

The following is recommended. However, this can be modified on the availability of personnel or upon the discretion of the Chief of the Hospital.

Chairperson: Chief of Medical Professional Services
Vice chair: Administrative Officer
Core Members:
Chief Nurse
Hospital Training Officer
Department heads, Supervisors from the different clinical departments
Representative of the Medical Staff or the President of the Medical Staff Organization
Representative of the Medical Residents or the President of the Medical Resident Organization
Finance Officers

2. Functions

1. Develop a general framework of their Continuous Quality Improvement Program
2. Recommend internal policy directions to hospital management
3. Oversee the CQI Annual Planning Activities and QA Program in the hospital
4. Recommend implementing guidelines and strategies within the hospitals
5. Exercise overall supervision, technical management and coordination of the program among the different hospital units
6. Oversee the implementation of quality assurance activities such as the use of clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) and / or treatment protocols
7. Resolve issues related to the implementation of the program
8. Provide periodic feedback to the Chief of Hospital and semi-annual reports to the Field Implementation and Coordination Team for Luzon and NCR, Visayas and Mindanao, copy furnished Policy Standards Development Team for Service Delivery
9. Implementation of the PHIC Benchbook on Quality Assurance

B. CQI Committee Deliverables

1. CQI program including internal hospital policies and guidelines based on the recommended framework discussed previously

2. Annual Continuing Quality Improvement (CQI) Plans and Activities

3. Annual Training Program on Continuing Quality Improvement (CQI) and Total Quality management (TQM) for the hospital staff

4. Periodic Reports to the Chief of Hospital and Semi—Annual Accomplishment Report submitted to the Field Implementation and Coordination Team for Luzon and NCR, Visayas and Mindanao, copy furnished Policy Standards Development Team for Service Delivery

5. Inventory of Policies and SOPs

C. Funding

Funding for this program and activities of the CQI Committee shall be included and provided for by the respective DOH hospitals in their Annual Hospital Budget.

VII. REPORTING/COMPLIANCE

The CQI Committee meets on a monthly basis, prepares and distributes an agenda and keeps attendance and written minutes of meetings. The Quality Management Committee completes an Annual Evaluation of the program and activities. The annual evaluation serves to analyze and evaluate the overall effectiveness and performance of the quality improvement activities. The evaluation includes a review of the QM program, the work plan, minutes of the monthly Committee meeting, and any reports. Trends are noted and proposed changes are made to continuously improve quality. Input from members of the Committee, members, workgroups, providers and staff are used to make the evaluation and recommendations for the next meeting.

As a result of various issues or concerns that occur during the course of the year in the CQI Committee, there may be a defined need to further study. The CQI Committee shall appoint as necessary, workgroups to review, investigate and report back to the CQI Committee as appropriate. Findings of these specific studies will be documented in the minutes of the CQI Committee meetings and included in the Annual CQI Evaluation.

VIII. MONITORING

All DOH Hospitals should set up Implementation of CQI Program and Committee by end of 2006. CQI Committee activities should be coordinated with other performance monitoring activities, including utilization management, risk management and resolution.

IX. REPEALING CLAUSE

Provisions of DC. No. 172-C s. 2003 and 300—J s. 2001 found inconsistent with this issuance shall be repealed.

X. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall take effect immediately.


</body>
<sign>FRANCISCO T. DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>