Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
2nd Floor Bldg. 1 San Lazaro Compound Rizal Avenue Sta. Cruz Manila
Telefax: (0632)743—1829 Trunkline: 743- 8301 loc 1125/1127/1128

   

<date>May 21, 2008</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2008 - 0011</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Revised Gujfglglines for: Implementing Tuberchosis Control Fragrant in Children</subject>

<body>
I. ‘RATIONALE/BACKGROUND

The goal of the National Strategic Plan to Stop TB 2006- 2010 and the Western Paciﬁc Regional Strategic Plan 2006- 2010, is to reduce the TB prevalence and mortality by half by 2010 (relative to 2000), contributing to the attainment of the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) come 2015. Among the objectives identiﬁed in these plans were to improve detection of all TB eases, adapt DOTS to respond to high- -risk:s population and ensure equitable access to care of international standards for all, TB. patients. This would mean reaching Out to all people with TB; adults and children, "infectious and non-infectious, with or Without HIV and with orwithout drug resistant TB.

To address TB in children, DOH c1 eated the Task Ferce (TF) on Childhood TB in 1998’ by Virtue of Dept. Order (D0) 248-11 3. 1998 as amended by DO 66- D s. 2001. This TF was composed of experts both from the public and private sector In 2002, DOTCh (DOT' In Children), was piloted in three areas Two years later, the DOE through the TF, released the 1St gurdehnes for TB in children through Administrative Order (A0) 178 s. 2004 which paved the way for the expansion of the program to 16 cities (1 city per regron) nationwide

In 2006, WHO issued the Guidance for National Tuberculosis Programmes on the Management of TB in Children. Because. of this, the DOH deemed it necessary to reconvene the TF and revise the current national guidelines in accordance with that of the WHO and forconsistency with the 2005 Manual of Procedure (MOP) for the National Tuberculosis Control Program (NTP) before embarkmg on a nationwide Implementation of the Childhood TB Program.

II. OBJECTIVES

The objectives of these guidelines are: to provide a standard policy for caseﬁnding; treatment of children with TB; contact tracing of children at risk of developing TB for preventive therapy; and to include all childhood TB cases in the routine NTP recording and reporting activities using the DOTS strategy. 

III. SCOPE/COVERAGE

These guidelines shall apply to: all health facilities, agencies and organizations that will implement Tuberculosis Control Program among: children 0—14 years old.

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS

Contacts for screening --;all. children; 0-4 years (whether sick or well) and Children 5-14 years: if symptomatic, who are in close contact with a source case

Close contact — is deﬁned. as a person living in the Samehousehoid as or in frequent Contact with a source case.

Isoniazird Preventive Therapy (IPT) - taking a course of isoniazid treatment to individuals who have not been infected in order to prevent development of TB disease.

Source case - a case of pulmonary TB (usually sputum smear-positive) which results in infection or disease among contacts.

TB Diagnostic Committee (TBDC) — is a committee established at the province, city or district level that will review the sputum smear-negatives with chest x—ray suggestive of pulmonary TB. It is composed of the NTP medical/nurse coordinators, radiologist and a clinician (internist or pulmonologist).

V. POLICY STATEMENTS

1. All children 0-14 years old who come to the health facility with signs and symptoms of TB and/or those Who are in close contact with a known TB case (usually an adult) shall be screened for TB
2. The diagnosis of TB in children depends on careful and thorough history and clinical examination and relevant 1nvest1gations e. g. Tuberculin Skin Testing (TST), Direct Sputum Smear Microscopy (DSSM) and Chest x-ray (CXR). A trial of treatment with anti-TB medicines shall not be used as a method of diagnosing. TB in children.
3. When a child is diagnosed with TB, an effort should be made to detect and cure the source
4. Treatment of TB disease in. children and Isoniazid Preventive Therapy (IPT) shall follow the 2006 WHO guidelines recommend dosages and regimen.
5. Directly Observed Treatment (DOT) shall be followed for all children undergoing therapy
6. Quarterly reports shall be submitted to the Infectlous Disease Ofﬁce through channels
7. To prevent severe types of TB in children and in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) BCG vaccination shall be given to all infants. However revaccination of BCG 13 not recommended

VI. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES

1.Case Finding

A. TB in children are reported and identiﬁed in two instances:
1. The child sought consultation, was screened and was found to have" signs and
symptoms of TB.
2. The child Was a close contact of a TB, case.

B. Approach to diagnosis:
1. Careful history and clinical examination (includmg growth assessment)

i. Symptoms a child shall be considered as a TB symptomatic if with any
three (3) of the following signs and symptoms:
	- Cough/wheezing of 2 weeks or more.
	- Unexplained fever of 2. weeks or more after common causes such as malaria or pneumonia have been excluded.
	- Loss of weight/failure to gain weight/weight faltering/loss of appetite
	- Failure to respond to 2 weeks of appropriate antibiotic therapy for
	lower respiratory tract infection.
	- Failure to gain previous state of health 21 weeks after a viral
	infection or exanthcrna (e. g. measles).
	- Fatigue/reduced playfulness/lethargy

ii. Physical signs highly suggestive of extrapulmonary TB
	- gibbus, especially of recent onset
	- non-painful enlarged cervical lymphadenopathy with ﬁstula
	formation

2. Tuberculin Skin Testing (TST)
i. The Mantoux method of TST is recommended using 2 TU of tuberculin
PPD RT23 or 5TU of tuberculin PPD—S if the former is not available.
iii. A positive TST is an area; of induration of the skin with diameter of
10mm or more read between 4.8 and 72 hrs of injection of thetuberculin
solution (whether or not they have received BCG vaccination).
iii. Only trained health worker shall do tuberculin testing and reading.

3. Investigations relevant for suspected. pulmonary or extrapulmonary TB

i. Diagnosis of Suspected Pulmonary TB:

1. Direct Sputum Smear Microscopy (DSSM) and bacteriologic
continuation whenever possible:
	- DSSM shall be performed among:
		- younger children (5-9 years old) who can expectorate
		- children 10-14 years old of >_2 weeks
	- if DSSM turns out positive, treatment shall be started immediately and TST shall no longer be performed. 
	- Collection, transport, processing and reporting of sputum specimen shall follow the 2005 MOP for the NTP.
	- Bacteriological conﬁrmation (culture), is especially important for children who have. Suspected drug-resistant TB, HIV infection complicated or severe disease and an uncertain diagnosis

2. Chest x-ray (CXR):
	- CXR shall not be used alone in the diagnosis of childhood pulmonary TB unless the ﬁnding is miliary tuberculosis. Majority of children with pulmonary TB have CXR changes suggestive of TB. The commonest picture is that of persistent opaciﬁcation in the lung together with enlarged hilar or subcarinal lymph glands.
	- Patients with persistent opaCi‘ﬁcation which does not improve after a course of antibiotics should be investigated for TB.

ii. Suspected Extrapulmonary TB are neually diagnosed. from the clinical
picture and confirmed by histology or other special investigations.


iii. Serological tests, nucleic acid ampliﬁcation (cg. polymerase chain reaCtion), computerized chest tomography and bronchoscopy can be used but are not currently recommended for routine diagnosis of TB in children

iv. The. T8 Diagnostic Committee (TBDC)
	1. In areas with functional TBDC, CXR of children with results suggestive of TB shall be referred to them for evaluation.
	2. To minimize delay in the diagnosis and treatment, result of the TBDC evaluation must be available within 2: weeks.

2. Case Deﬁnitions in Childhood TB— are determined by the: (i) site of disease, (iii) result of any bacteriological tests, (iii) severity of TB disease and (iV) history of previous anti-TB treatment.

	A. Classification of TB in Children - TB cases shall be classiﬁed based on the location of lesions, as well as the result of DSSM.
	B. Types of TB in children — these are categorized based on the history of anti-TB treatment.

Classiﬁcation and types of TB in children shall follow the case deﬁnitions
stated in A0 178 and to include those from the 2006 WHO guidelines.

3. Case Holding and Treatment

	A. Caseholding mechanism shall fellow A0 ”178 While treatment regimen. for TB disease and corresponding drug dosages shall follow the 2006 WHO guidelines.

	B. Fixed—dose combinations of drugs (FDC) shall be used whenever possible. However, single drug, formulations can still be used.

	C. Hospitalization: 
		1. Children with severe forms of TB shall be hospitalized initially for intensive management where possible.
		2. Conditions that warrant hospitalization include: TB meningitis and miliary TB, respiratory distress, spinal TB and severe adverse events, such as clinical signs of hepatotoxicity (cg. jaundice)

	D. Management of adverse reactions to the drugs

		1. Treatment shall be stopped and immediate referral of patient shall be undertaken in the occurrence of liver tenderness, hepatomegaly or jaundice.
		2. There is "no need to monitor serum liver enzyme levels routinely.

	E. Mintoring of response to treatment

		1. A smear positive child. shall have a followup DSSM similar to adult TB cases described in the 2005 MOP.
		2. For extrapulmonary and most of childhood TB cases, response to treatment shall be assessed clinically.
		3. Follow-up CXRs are not routinely required.

	F. Outcome of treatment
		The deﬁnition of the treatment outcomes as stated in A0 178 and the 2006 WHO guidelines shall be followed.

4. Contact Investigation:

Contact screening and: management as, described in the 2006 WHO guidelines
shall be adopted under these revised guidelines.

5. Special circumstances:

Management of special. circumstances such as baby born to a mother of infectious TB and contacts of conﬁrmed drug—resistant TB, shall be accordingly
addressed.

6. Recording and reporting:

A. Agegroups for reporting shall be divided into the following age groups:

	a. 0-4 years old.

	b. 52-14 years old.

B. Indicators for this program shall include but not limited to the following:
	a. Number of children screened, categorized by agegroup
	b. Number treated for TB disease
	c. Proportion of all childhood TB cases by agegroup
	d. Proportions of children with pulmonary TB and extrapulmonary TB
	e. Proportion of children with miliary TB and TB meningitis
	f. Proportion of children who are cured (smear-positive)
	g. Proportion of children who completed treatment (smear—negative pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB)
	h. Number given IPT and outcome, including treatment completion


VII. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISMS
	The roles and responsibilities of the, different agencies, health workers, and other partners implementing this program shall be in accordance with the 2005 MOP for the NTP. Training modules are also beingupdated to conform to this revised Administrative Order.

VIII. REPEALING CLAUSE

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly.

IX. EFFECTIVITY

This order shall take effect immediately.

</body>    

<sign>FRANCISCO T.DUQUE III, MD., MSc.</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

