Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Bldg. 1. San Lazro Cmpd., Rizal Ave
Sta Cruz, Manila, Philippines 1003
Tel # (02) 743-8301 local 1101/1102; Telefax (02) 741-1366


<date>May 7, 2008</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2008-0014</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Pilot Implementation of the Electronic Essential Drug Price Monitoring System (e-EDPMS)</subject>    

<body>
I. 	BACKGROUND/RATIONALE

Pursuant to RA 7581, also known as "Pride Act", and its Implementing Rules and Regulations, the Department of Health (DOH) became the lead implementing agency in identifying essential drugs as "basic necessities" and monitoring their corresponding prices. Further, Section 10 (Powers and Responsibilities of Implementing Agencies) of RA 7581 empowers the DOH to acquire the necessary informational requirement in implementing the said Act.  As such, various DOH policies and guidelines were crafted in order to provide a system and procedure for data collection on prices of selected essential drugs, which is now known as the Essential Drug Price Monitoring System (EDPMS). The need to sustain the operations of the EDPMS and at the same time adaptively upgrade its specifications to suit current and emerging trends in the market paved the way for the issuance of Administrative Order 2006-0009 entitled, ”Guidelines Institutionalizing and Strengthening the Essential Drug Price Monitoring System”.

Relevant and timely information are essential to the effective implementation  and management of EDPMS. It is for this reason that a computer based system solution  or software was developed to capture, process, store and report vital information on essential drug prices and inventories nationwide. Accordingly, the electronic EDPMS (e—EDPMS) software is hereby adopted for pilot implementation. in selected pharmaceutical companies and drugstores.

II. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS

A. Definition

1. Drug Establishrnent - any organization or company involved in the
manufacture, importation, repacking, and/or distribution of drugs and,
medicines (for specifics, refer to Chapter I, A0 No. 56 s. 1989' dated 03
January 1989).
2. Drug Outlet - drugstores and any other business establishments which sell
drugs or medicineslfor specifics, refer to Chapter II, AD. No. 56. s, 1989
dated 03 January 1989).

B. Acronyms

1. BFAD — Bureau of Food and Drugs
2. CHD — Center for Health Development
3. DOH — Department of Health
4. IMS - Information Management Service
5. IRR — Implementing Rules and Regulations
6. LTO — License to Operate
7. NDP-PMU 50 - National Drug Policy -Pharmaceutical Management Unit
8. e-EDPMS — Electronic Essential Drug Price Monitoring System
9. SIS — Stock Inventory System

III. OBJECTIVES

The objectives of this Order are as follows:

1. Establish standard systems and procedures for collecting, submitting, processing, and analyzing prices and inventories of drugs through electronic
means and/or establishment of electronic monitoring formats; and

2. Prescribe the roles and responsibilities of the DOH Implementing Offices and selected CHDs involved in the implementation of the e-EDPMS pursuant to this Order.

IV. SCOPE AND COVERAGE
A The Scope of this Order is as follows

1. Pilot Drug Establishments and Drug Outlets as determined and
coordinated by NDP-PMU 50.

2. Pilot Center for Health Development regional offices - DOH as determined and coordinated by ‘NDP—PMU 50.

3. DOH Implementing Offices

3.1 Bureau of Food and Drugs
3.2 National Drug: Policy - Pharmaceutical Management Unit
3.3 Information Management Service

B. This Order shall cover the, following activities: data- entry, submission,
processing and analysis undertaken by the DOH Implementing Offices and
pilot pharmaceutical companies/outlets and CHDs, using the e—EDPMS.

V IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES

1. Roles and Responsibilities of DOH Concerned Agencies

A. The DOH NDP—PMU 50 shall be the lead unit (Lead System Implementer) charged in implementing the e-EDPMS and shall:

1. Provide overall management in the implementation of the e-EDPMS.
2. Provide the required resources (manpower, time, budget) to succesfully implement the system.
3. Assign, give and maintain User Identifications and Passwords of all drug establishments and outlets.
4. In coordination with the IMS, harmonize all regulatory standards and processes with the Information and Communication Technology intervention and other future enhancements as may deemed appropriate.
5. Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the system.
6. Collate updated reports from BFAD, IMS and the CHDs.
7. Conduct regular reviews on the quality of data submitted.
8. Analyze and interpret data/information generated by the system.

B. The BFAD (System Support) shall:

1. Regularly provide NDP-PMU 50 the updated list of drugs and licensed drug establishments and outlets using the standard format or definition of IMS.
2. Conduct regular reviews on the quality of data / information, submitted to DOH.
3. Analyze/interpret data, information and/or reports generated by the system. 
4. Release official reports resulting from the e-EDPMS processing and consolidation.

C. The IMS (ICT Support) shall:

1. Provide technical support in the deployment and operations of e-EDPMS software.
2. Maintain the software by correcting problems, troubleshooting, and
enhancing the functionalities if necessary.
3. Ensure 99.99% uptime during system operations.
4. Train CHDs technical support personnel on how to conduct Users' Orientation and Training, and use of the Software.
5.  Monitor the performance of the system during operations.
6. Train NDP—PMU 50 staff on system operations, maintenance and
troubleshooting.

D. The CHDs (System Trainer and Technical Support) shall:

1. Orient and train drug establishments and outlets on how to operate the e—EDPMS SIS and Web-based systems like Uploading, Downloading and other functionalities available.
2. Troubleshoot issues, concerns, and/or problems related to the system.
3. Monitor compliance of drug: establishments and, outlets in using the system.


2. Drug establishments and outlets shall comply with the standard systems and procedures of entering: drug prices and inventories, and submitting the data to the NDP-PMU 50. On the other hand, DOH Implementing Offices shall comply with the standard systems and procedures of processing, analyzing and posting official reports to the: DOH web portal.

a. The official website address of the» e-EDPMS is http://umis.doh.gov.ph/edms. Software installer, system documentations, software updates, web-based systems, uploads and downloads can be accessed through this website address.

b. Through the e-EDPMS System Administration Central Office System, the NDP—PMU 50 Shall assign unique User Identifications and Passwords to drug establishments and outlets who shall be using the e—EDPMS SIS and Web-Based Uploading System.

c. Drug establishments and/or outlets with existing computer-based systems shall comply with the following:

i. Download the data dictionary or definition of the data sets to be electronically sent or uploaded to the DOH Central Office. Technical documentation is available on the e-EDPMS website address.

ii. Request for User identifications and Passwords from the DOH NDP- PMU 50 to gain access to the Web-Based Uploading System.

d. For drug establishments and outlets without existing computer-based systems, the stand-alone e—EDPMS SIS shall be used to enter purchases and sales transact1on data.

e. On a daily basis, from 5:00 p.m.to 8:00 a.m., data. from the e-EDPMS SIS shall be electronically sent or uploaded. to the EDPMS website address.

f. The NDP-PMU 50 shall process, review, validate, and analyze the submitted drug price and inventory data and reports before any official results are displayed or can be retrieved from the system. The NDP—PMU 50 shall use the e-EDPMS Client-Based Report Generation facility to process the data.

3. Effective, upon signing of this Administrative Order, the BFAD, NDP—PMU 50 and IMS of the DOH must-assure that the e-EDPMS software is deployed to all pilot sites defined in item IV (A), #s 1 and 2. Deployment of the system includes orientation, software installation, provision of minimum training, manuals and other required training documents or materials.

4. Drug establishments and outlets are required to use the e-EDPMS SIS and/or Web-Based Uploading System in submitting the prices and inventories of drugs to the DOH Central Office. Compliance and use of these standard systems or software shall be part of the performance evaluation of drug establishments and outlets for the issuance and renewal of their License to Operate.

i. For the initial issuance of LTO, drug establishments and outlets shall be compelled to concur for the procurement of the recommended hardware and operating system required to implement e—EDPMS.

ii. Drug establishments and outlets shall coordinate with their nearest CHD for the schedule of software training to be conducted by the regional Computer operators.

VI. SANCTIONS FOR NON-COMPLIANCE

The: sanctions Shall be imposed for non—compliance to implement the e—EDPMS:

1. Pursuant to Section 10, no.11 of the Price Act, and Rule IV, Section 8 of its IRR, the DOH may impose sanctions to drug establishrnents and outlets who fail to comply with the use of the standard e-EDPMS SIS and/or Web~Based Uploading System, and send the drug prices and inventories to the DOH Central Office.

2. DOH Implementing Offices who failed to perform their roles, responsibilities, and other duties required shall be sanctioned based on the appropriate provisions of the laws and statutes governing employees and officers of the Government.

VII. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.

If any provision in these guidelines, or application of such provision to any circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of these guidelines shall not be affected thereby.

VIII. EFFECTIVITY

This Order shall be effective immediately.
</body>

<sign>FRANCISCO DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>