Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>November 16, 2009</date>

<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2009 — 0028</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Designation of the Newborn Screening Reference Center (NSRC), National Institutes of Health-University of the Philippines Manila to Oversee the Quality Assurance Program for G6PD Confirmatorv Test. </subject>

<body>
I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

Under Section 4 of the Republic Act (RA) 9288 or the Newborn Screening Act of 2004, one of the components of the National Comprehensive Newborn Screening System (NCNBSS) is the tracking and conﬁrmatory testing thereof to ensure the accuracy of screening results. 

In accordance with this, Art. 4 Sec. 10—4 of RA 9288 mandates the Department of Health to “coordinate with the NIH Newborn Screening Reference Center for the accreditation of Newborn Screening Centers and preparation of deﬁned testing protocols and quality assurance programs.” 

Subsequently, the NCNBSS has initiated steps to ensure accessibility of conﬁrmatory testing centers to the relevant public and to guarantee quality of conﬁrmatory results. The move has started with the Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase (G6PD) deﬁciency, one of the disorders included in the newborn screening panel. It is a condition where the body lacks the ”eﬁzyme called G6PD. Babies with this deﬁciency may have hemolytic nemia resulting from exposure to oxidative substances found in drugs, foods and chemicals. Among the ﬁve congenital metabolic disorders being screened in the Philippines, G6PD Deﬁciency has the highest prevalence rate of one out of ﬁfty—ﬁve (1:55). 

Since the start of the newborn screening program, almost 60,000 babies were initially found deﬁcient in G6PD, about 50% of which have not undergone conﬁrmatory test due to ﬁnancial reasons and accessibility of the test. With the release of Department Memo No. 2008-0123 “Newborn Screening Coverage”, the number of patients that need conﬁrmatory test for G6PD is expected to increase. 

Some of the steps undertaken by the NCNBSS were the appointment of an Expert Committee on G6PD Deﬁciency which participates in the review of datasets and cutoffs of the disorder, treatment and management protocols among others; and the identiﬁcation of tertiary hospitals in the different regions of the country equipped and willing to integrate G6PD enzyme assay as one of their services. 

The next step in the efforts to ensure the quality of the conﬁrmatory results of the disorders included in the newborn screening panel, is the establishment of the quality assurance program, initially for G6PD conﬁrmatory test in the country. NSRC being the central facility at the NIH that deﬁnes testing and follow-up protocols, maintains an external laboratory proﬁciency testing program is the ideal agency to manage the quality assurance program for the G6PD Deﬁciency Conﬁrmatory Testing. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

To designate the Newborn Screening Reference Center (N SRC) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), University of the Philippines, Manila to oversee the quality assurance program for G6PD Conﬁrmatory test in the country. 

III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE 

This Order shall apply to the Newborn Screening Reference Center and other health facilities that shall run G6PD Conﬁrmatory Test. 

IV. GUIDELINES 

The NSRC is designated to oversee the quality assurance program for G6PD conﬁrmatory test. Facilities that shall provide G6PD Conﬁrmatory testing in their laboratories in country shall comply with the standards set by NSRC. 

Roles and Responsibilities: 

NSRC: 
1. Provide technical assistance to laboratories offering G6PD conﬁrmatory test; 
2. Ensure good laboratory practice in laboratories doing G6PD conﬁrmatory test by establishing external laboratory proﬁciency testing and certiﬁcation program in partnership with the International QA Program in Taiwan for G6PD. NSRC shall send Proﬁciency Testing Samples to G6PD testing Laboratories every two months and submit the results to the International QA Program in Taiwan; and 
3. Report and make recommendations, if necessary, to the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (N CDPC) semi—annually. 

G6PD Testing Laboratories: 

1. Provide skilled medical technologists to extract blood from neonates and perform the G6PD conﬁrmatory testing services on a regular basis, at least once a week; 
2. Provide immediate relay of G6PD conﬁrmatory results (whether conﬁrmed positive or negative) to the patient’s family, attending physician and Newborn Screening Center’s for their records;  
3. Comply with the standard conﬁrmatory testing fee set by the Department of Health; 
4. Comply with the standards set by NSRC to ensure good laboratory practice; and 
5. Participate in the International QA program set by NSRC by running quality assurance samples and submit the result to NSRC. 

Funding 

Incidental costs for sending of quality assurance samples to G6PD Conﬁrmatory Testing Laboratories shall be shouldered by the NSRC. 

V. REPEALING CLAUSE 

This shall repeal and supersede all administrative issuances inconsistent thereof. 

VI. EFFECTIVITY 

This shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after completion of its publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 

This Order takes effect immediately
</body>

<sign>FRANCISCO DUQUE III, MD, MSc</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle> 

Building # 1, San Lazaro Compound, Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz, 1003 Manila - Trunkline: 7438301 - Directline: 7119501 - Telefax: (632) 7431829; 7431786 - URL: httn://www.doh.gov.ph ; E-mail: osec@doh.gov.ph 



