Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>Dec 22, 2010</date>
<docnum>No. 2010 - 0037 </docnum>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>


<subject>SUBJECT: Diagnosis and Treatment Guidelines for Paragonimiasis</subject>


<body>
I. BACKGROUND/ RATIONALE 

Paragonimiasis (International Classiﬁcation of Disease-10: Code B66.4) is a parasitic disease acquired through eating raw or improperly cooked crustaceans and which causes a subacute to chronic inﬂammatory disease of the lungs. The ﬁrst documented case was seen in an autopsy in Taiwan or Formosa province in 1879 hence the common name of oriental lung ﬂuke was ascribed to it. In the Philippines, raw and undercooked crab or crayﬁsh are commonly eaten in certain endemic regions. 

Paragonimiasis is most commonly found in the Bicol region, with Sorsogon Province having a high prevalence rate of 25% (CHD-S data, 2009) and parts of Oriental Mindoro (Belizario et al PJMID vol. 26, 1997) in Luzon and Zamboanga Peninsula in Mindanao, where the fresh water crab or crayﬁsh eaten raw is a popular dish. Paragonimiasis may also be acquired by consuming raw meat from a paratenic host (e.g.wild boar) that contains young flukes. Infection may also be transmitted via contaminated kitchen utensils (e.g., Cutting boards, knives) or from cloths used to squeeze and strain juices from crabs for the preparation of soup. 

Factors that facilitate the life cycle of the ﬂukes and subsequent transmission of infection to humans include: large numbers of reservoir hosts (rodents, cats and dogs), intermediate hosts (crabs & crayﬁsh) and paratenic hosts (wild boar); and, eating habits (eating raw or improperly cooked crustaceans such as freshwater mountain crabs). 

In known endemic areas in the Philippines it is often misdiagnosed as PTB and treated as such. Since Paragonimiasis may lead to a disabling disease when left untreated, it is of clinical importance to catch the disease early in its course by using the correct diagnostic tool, appropriate drug of choice in the correct dosage and in the recommended duration. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

To provide healthcare providers with clinical guidelines in the diagnosis, treatment and management of paragonimiasis. 

III. COVERAGE AND SCOPE 

This Guideline shall apply to all health workers in the national, regional, local, public and private health facilities who directly treat patients. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

A. AFB Staining - Acid Fast Bacilli staining, a laboratory method wherein the tubercle bacilli are demonstrated. 

B. CSF- Cerebrospinal ﬂuid. Fluid found in the spinal canal wherein samples could be taken for analysis to ﬁnd a disease agent. 

C. ICD10- International Classiﬁcation of Disease is a coding of disease & signs as classiﬁed by the World Health Organization (WHO). 

D. Eosinophilia- state of having a high amount of eosinophils in the blood usually above 0.5 x 10 9th 

E. FECT— Formalin-Ether Concentration Technique is used in recovering parasite eggs in stool. 

F. PTB- Pulmonary Tuberculosis, primary lung infection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. 

G. Paratenic- A host which is not needed for the development of the parasite but nonetheless serves as a transport host and carries the infective stage of the parasite. 

H. Paragonimiasis is a food—borne parasitic infection caused by the lung ﬂuke Paragonimus spp. 

I. Paragonimus westermani A lung fluke which causes human paragonimiasis in the Philippines presenting with an acute to chronic pulmonary disease with symptoms similar to those of PTB. Also known as the Oriental Lung Fluke. 

J. Monoplegia—paralysis of a single limb, usually the arms. 

K. Paraplegia- paralysis of both lower limbs. 

V. GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES 

A. Clinical Presentation 
1. Acute Paragonimiasis 

About 20% of patients with paragonimiasis are asymptomatic. Abdominal pain, diarrhea, and urticaria occur during the acute phase, which corresponds to the period of invasion and migration of immature ﬂukes. These initial symptoms are followed a few days later by fever, cough, dyspnea, chest pain, malaise, and sweats. The acute phase usually persists for several weeks. 

2. Chronic Paragonimiasis During the chronic phase, manifestations may be pulmonary or extrapulmonary. 

a. Pulmonary Paragonimiasis 

Chronic pulmonary symptoms consist of dry cough followed by a cough productive of tenacious and rusty sputum. Pulmonary symptoms begin approximately 6 months after infection and are often mistaken as those of pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB). Eosinophilia and lack of fever are consistent with diagnosis of paragonimiasis. Peripheral eosinophilia is present in as many as 25% of patients (Patterson et al, Cooper Univ. Hospital 2009). Patients frequently report vague chest discomfort, dyspnea on exertion, or wheezing. Life-threatening hemoptysis may occur in some cases. ~ 

The lungs are normally clear but rales, egophony, or dullness to percussion may occur with complications such as pneumonia or pleural effusion. Cough begins as dry and progresses to productive with blood-tinged sputum. The late clinical picture is similar to chronic bronchitis or bronchiectasis with profuse expectoration, pleuritic chest pain, dyspnea, cough, and occasional hemoptysis. 

b. Extra-pulmonary Paragonimiasis 

This can be divided into cerebral, abdominal, subcutaneous, and miscellaneous forms of the disease. Extra—pulmonary paragonimiasis can occur either from the migration of juvenile or immature flukes to various organs or from eggs that enter the circulation and are carried to the following sites: 

- Liver
- Splee
- Kidne
- Brain
- Intestinal wall
- Peritoneum
- Mesenteric lymph nodes
- Muscle
- Testis/ovary
- Subcutaneous tissues
- Spinal cord 

Eggs and worms may also cause surrounding cysts, abscesses, or granuloma formation. Cysts may occur in the intestinal wall, liver, spleen, abdominal wall, peritoneal cav1ty, or mesenteric lymph nodes. Symptoms may include bloody diarrhea or abdominal paln. 

b.1. Cerebro-spinal Paragonimiasis 

Cerebral paragonimiasis occurs in less than 1% of symptomatic patients, it is the most common extra-pulmonary site of infection and is responsible for 50% of all extra- pulmonary disease. Moreover, it is seen in as many as 25% of patients requiring hospitalization. This form of the disease is also particularly common in children. Early symptoms resemble meningo-encephalitis and may persist for 1-2 months. Signs and symptoms include headache, vomiting, seizures, weakness, facial palsy, hemiplegia, and paraplegia. Spinal involvement may produce monoplegia, paraplegia, lower extremity paresthesias, or sensory loss. 

Other clinical manifestations will depend on the organ involved. Ocular signs include impaired visual acuity because of optic atrophy, papilledema, and hemianopsia. Findings in cases of abdominal involvement may include palpable masses.With kidney involvement, hematuria may be observed, and eggs may sometimes be detected in the urlne. 

Patients with subcutaneous paragonimiasis can present with migratory swelling or subcutaneous nodules containing immature ﬂukes. These ﬁrm, mobile, and tender subcutaneous nodules are often found in the lower abdominal and inguinal region. Scrotal paragonimiasis may mimic epididymitis or an incarcerated hernia. 

Diagnosis 
1. Case ﬁnding or screening cases 
Patients with unresolved symptoms such as chronic cough and with or without blood tinged sputum in spite of adequate treatment with anti—TB medicationsor with a negative sputum AFB result shall undergo 3 sputum examinations on separate days for paragonimiasis (separate from sputum AFB). A stool exam using FECT technique is recommended for patients having difﬁculty in producing expectorated sputum specimen. Likewise, additional effort in history taking should be exerted to determine history of travel to endemic areas, the dietary predilection to crustaceans/crustacean—laced soup and or some form of paratenic host. 

2. Laboratory Findings: 
The Diagnostic tool of choice: Sputum examination 

a. Deﬁnitive diagnosis of Paragonimiasis requires detection of eggs in sputum, feces, pleural ﬂuid, cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), or pus. However, eggs may not be present in feces and sputum for 2-3 months after the initial infection. Egg detection rates for paragonimiasis average 25-35% for a single sputum specimen but may reach 50% with multiple examinations. (minimum of 3 examinations have been recommended). The yield for specimens obtained via bronchoscopy is 53-67%. 

b. Worms or eggs may be found in biopsies of pulmonary, cerebral, subcutaneous, intra—abdominal nodules or cystic lesions. The speciﬁc species causing paragonimiasis can be identiﬁed from adult or immature ﬂukes found in surgical specimens (rarely in the sputum). 

c. Stool examinations shall be used to diagnose paragonimiasis in patients having difﬁculty in expectorating sputum. 

d. Complete Blood Count with differential count usually reveals eosinophilia in 10- 30% of patients with paragonimiasis. The degree of eosinophilia is signiﬁcantly higher in patients who have pleurisy. Leukocytosis with eosinophilia occurs early in the course of disease but then resolves over time. Despite remarkable eosinophilia, total WBC count remains in the normal range or slightly elevated. 

e. Histologic-pathological ﬁndings in the lungs will vary depending on the worm burden and disease chronicity. Adult ﬂukes are typically encapsulated in cysts, which tend to occur in the right lung. Patients usually have fewer than 20 cysts, each of which contains 24 ﬂukes. The cyst wall is thick, sclerotic, and sometimes calciﬁed. Microscopically, the cyst wall contains granulation tissue with ﬁbroblasts, mononuclear cells, plasma cells, lymphoid cells, and eosinophils. Numerous Charcot- Leyden crystals and eggs are formed in the cavity, and egg-containing granuloma frequently develops near the cyst. Bronchial arteries may show hypertrophy or may rupture from damage. 

f. Serologic Tests for paragonimiasis are useful because of the relatively low percentage of egg detection. Serologic tests aid in diagnosing extra-pulmonary disease where eggs are not shed in the sputum or stool. Examples of this tests which are available in the world market are Complement ﬁxation test, ELISA and rapid Immunoblot test. 

g. Intradermal skin testing with an extract of adult Paragonimus is reasonably sensitive, although rare false-negative results could occur. Results may remain positive for as long as 20 years after cure. Skin testing is useful as an epidemiologic tool to detect prevalence of infection and is the most commonly used test for screening. Because this test can cross react with Clonorchz's sinensz's and Schistosoma japom'cum, it should only be used for purposes of screening. 

h. Chest radiography reveals abnormalities in approximately 80—90% of patients; however, chest ﬁlms are normal in 13-20% of conﬁrmed cases. Radiographic abnormalities may include ring shadows, which represent cavitating lesions, ﬁbrosis, nodules or linear inﬁltrates with calciﬁed foci, loculated pleural effusions, and pleural thickening.Three radiographic stages of pulmonary infection have been described as follows: 

h.1. Migration of larvae can result in pneumothorax with consolidation or exudative pleural effusions. 

h.2. During ﬂuke maturation nodular or cystic lesions predominantly develop in the periphery of the middle and lower lobes." 

h.3. Bronchiectasis can also occur at this time. Following treatment, lesions gradually disappear over 3-26 months. 

i. Computerized Tomography scan (CT) or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the head may reveal cerebral calciﬁcations, cystic lesions, or hydrocephalus. Chronic cerebral paragonimiasis may be suspected by the presence of a "soap bubble lesion," with scattered calciﬁcations. 

C. Therapeutic Management: 

1. Medical Management 
a. Praziquantel —— is the drug of choice and is given 75mg/day per orem (P0) in 3 divided doses for 2 days for all ages. It is the WHO recommended treatment regimen for paragonimiasis and has a cure rate of 80% to 90%. Antiparasitic therapy is the mainstay of Paragonimiasis treatment and all other treatment modalities are secondary or adjunctive in nature. 

b. Anticonvulsant / Seizure medications - may also be administered for seizures caused by an inﬂammatory reaction to dying worms in the setting of cerebral paragonimiasis. 

b.l Phenytoin 

This regimen is widely available and inexpensive. It has signiﬁcant drug interactions, however, thus the dosage need to be adjusted based on therapeutic effect and serum levels. Fosphenytoin may be considered for Intravenous (IV) administration if available because it is better tolerated than (IV) phenytoin, it is considerably more expensive than phenytoin through. 

Adult Dosing: 

For non-emergent situations: 100 mg may be given PO three times a day (tid); then this may be adjusted based on therapeutic effect and serum level Emergent situations: 1 gram (g) IV loading dose (not to exceed 50 mg/min) or P0 in 3 divided doses every two (2) hours 
Therapeutic: 10-20 mcg/mL or 12 mcg/mL for free phenytoin 

Pediatric Dosing: 
For on-emergent situations: 5 mg/kg PO every day (qd) or divided twice a day (bid)/ thrice a day (tid); then adjust by therapeutic effect and serum level 
For emergent situations: 10-15 mg/kg IV loading dose 
Therapeutic: 10-20 meg/ml. 

c. Corticosteroid medication —— may be added when treating cerebral paragonimiasis to reduce the occurrence of seizures. 

c.1 Prednisone This is inexpensive, widely available, and effective. It may be used in patients with signiﬁcant edema, mass effect, or vasculitis 

Adult Dosing: 1 mg/kg/day, IV/PO qd or divided doses 

Pediatric Dosing: May be administered as in adults, divided doses may decrease gastrointestinal (GI) tract upset. 

2. Hospital ICU Admission 
Patients presenting with unstable vital signs and/or with massive hemoptysis, seizures shall be referred to the nearest health facility for hospitalization. 

3. Consultations 

In addition to consultations with an infectious diseases specialist, the following specialist may be visited, depending on the particular manifestations of the disease: 

- Pulmonologist 
- Neurologist 
- Surgeon 
- Neurosurgeon 

4. Surgical Management 

Extra-pulmonary lesions shall be surgically excised (such as intra-abdominal lesions causing obstruction). 

a. An intra—ventricular shunt may be needed to manage hydrocephalus in cerebral paragonimiasis. 

b. Immediate referral shall be done for surgical correction of all cases of strangulated and incarcerated inguinal hernias secondary to extra-pulmonary paragonimiasis. 

 
VI. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

A. Public Health Workers Duties and ReSponsibilities: 

1. National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (N CDPC): 

- Shall be responsible for provision of technical assistance to the Centers for Health Development (CHDs) and local health units. 

- Shall be responsible for leveraging resources for effective implementation of this A0. 

- Shall assist the National Epidemiology Center (NBC) in paragonimiasis outbreak investigations by providing technical support and assistance to the investigating team. 

- Shall develop prototypes of Information Education Communiction (IEC) materials in collaboration with National Center for Health Promotion (NCHP). 

2. Local Government Units (LGU): 

- All public health workers shall exert all efforts to provide information on food hygiene particularly concerning the dangers of eating raw or inadequately cooked crustaceans. Safe food preparation and consumption shall be emphasized. 

- The LGU health units are encouraged to develop IEC materials on Paragonimiasis in the local vernacular based on the prototypes of DOH— NCDPC and NCHP. 

- The LGU medical technologists are encouraged to update their skills in identifying paragonimus eggs in sputum examinations by attending the refresher trainings as necessary to be provided by the CHDs concerned. 

- The LGU shall undertake strict measures to protect water sources especially rivers and lakes from fecal pollution. 

- The LGU health units shall conduct sputum examination on all patients suspected with paragonimiasis (e.g. sputum AFB negative patients). This is necessary document increase cases of the disease in a given area. 

- The Municipal Health ofﬁcer concerned shall thoroughly investigate reports of a DOTS treated, sputum negative but unresolved case (e.g. coughing w/ blood tinged sputum) and shall request for sputum and stool exam of suspected cases immediately. 

- The LGU shall send updated reports on the status of paragonimiasis cases in their areas of reponsibilities to the CHD Regional Coordinator. 

- The LGU shall formulate a work and ﬁnancial plan and provide sufﬁcient funding for Praziquantel including funding for the emergency purchase of thereof in the event that stocks are depleted because of unforeseen increase in cases. 

3. Center for Health Development/DOH Provincial Health Team Ofﬁces in each province 

- The Regional Epidemiology & Surveillance Units (RESU) shall conduct investigations on suspected paragonimiasis cases or outbreaks, especially in areas with no previous history of the disease. Initial cases or suspected cases shall be reported at once to the National Epidemiology Center (NBC) and National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC) for further investigations and veriﬁcations. 

- The CHD shall conduct when necessary, training for Medical Technologists and Medical Ofﬁcers of both LGUs and retained Hospitals to update their skills in the diagnosing of the disease. 

- The CHD shall send regular reports of cases to the National Program Manager. 

- The CHD shall maintain adequate buffer stocks of praziquantel to address possible future outbreaks. 


VII. REPEALING CLAUSE 
All the rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provision stated in this treatment guideline are hereby amended accordingly. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY 
This order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after ﬁling with the University of the Philippines Law Center, or upon posting/publication in the DOH Internet. 
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD, FPCS, FAC</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
