Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>08/01/2012</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>NO. 2012 - 00016 </docnum>
<subject>
SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE CONDUCT OF MASS BLOOD SURVEY FOR MALARIA CASE FINDING. </subject>
<body>


I. RATIONALE 

With approximately 8,000 malaria cases in 2011, the reduction in morbidity from malaria has effectively been reduced by more than 90% when compared to the baseline year of 2006. While it may be more accurate to actually compare 3-5 year averages, nevertheless, the deﬁnite downward trend in cases imposes the need to develop new systems for monitoring disease prevalence in stable and unstable transmission areas or incidence in sporadic transmission or malaria—prone areas. In addition, since public health efforts are now being upgraded ﬁom control to elimination, there is a deﬁnite need to address the issue of presenting the “true malaria picture”. 

In the past, Mass Blood Survey (MBS) was conducted for this particular purpose. This meant taking malaria blood smears ﬁ’orn sections of the population which might be harboring the parasite while being symptomatic or asymptomatic. This is clearly differentiated ﬁom Active Case Detection (ACD) where blood samples are drawn from those who may manifest with signs and symptoms of the disease. 

With the levels of the disease reduced as they are and with more areas reaching pre— elimination status, there is a deﬁnite need to review and re-evaluate the current use of the MBS activities and the manner in which they are conducted. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Order shall provide speciﬁc indications for the use of Mass Blood Survey for I malaria case detection and shall set the operating procedures for the conduct. of MBS based on varying indications. 


III. SCOPE and COVERAGE: 

This guideline shall apply to all health workers in the national, regional, local, public and private health facilities whose ﬁmctions and activities contributes to the conduct of mass blood surveys. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS: 



1. Malaria case is a person in whom regardless of the presence or absence of clinical symptoms; malaria parasites have been conﬁrmed by quality laboratory diagnosis. 

2. Stable transmission areas are areas with continuous presence of at least one indigenous malaria case in a month for 6 months or more at any time during the past three years. 

3. Unstable transmission areas are areas with continuous presence of at least one malaria indigenous case in a month for less than 6 months at any time during the past three years 

4. Snorglic transmission areas are areas with at least one indigenous malaria case at any time in the past 5 years. 

5.Malaria -prone areas are areas with no indigenous malaria case for 5 years even in the presence of the vector. 

6.Indigenous malaria case is a case the origin of which from local transmission cannot be disproved. 

7.Mass blood survev refers to the examination of blood ﬁlms from every person through microscopy in a community or a group of communities or in a population of an area for the purpose of identifying the individual cases with parasites or carriers of parasites who are not seen. 

8. Active case detection is the process of aggressively looking for fever cases in the community, requiring a regular house to house visit by the health staff and volunteer workers to identify cases with fever. It is most useﬁil and recommended in sporadic transmission areas and malaria-prone areas. 

9. Control phase refers to the category of a province with at least 1 barangay with stable transmission 

10. Pro-elimination phase refers to the category of a province with at least 1 barangay with unstable transmission or there is less than 1 case per 1000 population. 

11. Elimination phase refers to the category of province where all the barangays are categorized with sporadic transmission or there are no barangays classiﬁed with stable or unstable areas or with at least 1 indigenous case in the past 5 years. 

V. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES ON THE CONDUCT OF MASS BLOOD SURVEY 

A. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

1. The DOH Malaria Control Program takes a more purposive approach in dealing with malaria by moving its direction from prevention to control to elimination. 

2. Areas with sporadic transmission which are considered to be at the elimination phase, shall institute mechanisms that will halt local transmission from an indigenous case and shall prevent the re-introduction of the infection in areas that are qualiﬁed as malaria-prone. 

3. Malaria surveillance shall be instituted as a critical component of the health care system. Three approaches in malaria surveillance can be adopted depending on the rate of transmission in the area (stratiﬁcation). These include active case detection (ACD), passive case detection (PCB) and mass blood survey (MBS). 

4. Mass Blood Survey Shall be used to detect all parasite carriers with asymptomatic parasitemia in sporadic transmission and malaria—prone areas where only one or no indigenous case is present in the last ﬁve years. 

5. Blood slide collection shall be done by a trained health worker/barangay health worker. 

6. Biosafety in handling blood specimens and disposal of infectious wastes shall be ensured. 

B. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES: 1. Mass Blood Surveys to determine prevalence. 

1.1 Mass blood surveys shall be done in areas which have reached the pre-elimination or elimination phase and where last indigenous case was reported in provinces about to be declared malaria—free. 

1.2 Health education campaign shall precede the MBS to have a maximum cooperation from the community to be carried out by RHMidwife and malaria coordinator. 

1.3 It shall be done by house to house and every individual, at least 90% of the population shall be screened. 

1-4 Where biosafety in handling blood specimens and disposal of infectious wastes shall be ensured, medical technicians/laboratory technicians, barangay microscopist and BHWs are advised to observe the following procedures. 

1.4.1 Wear surgical hand gloves when taking and handling blood specimens. Do not touch the eyes, nose or other exposed membranes of the skin with the gloved hands. 

1.4.2 Discard gloves (by treating with chemical before disposing). Wash hands with soap and water and put on new gloves.

1.4.3 Wash punctured wounds, cuts and skin contaminated by spills or splashes of blood thoroughly with soap and water 

1.4.4 Place used lancets in a puncture-resistant container (e. g. puncture-proof box, glass containers, thick hard plastic bottles/ jars, etc.) immediately. 

1.4.5 Do not re—use gloves. Discard used gloves and cotton ball with blood into bio—hazard container. 

1.5 Proper collection, preparation, labeling, drying and ﬁxing of malaria blood ﬁlms to produce high quality, standardized specimens for microscopy shall include the following: 

1.5.1 Use of new, pre—cleaned and grease-free glass slides. 

1.5.2 Always use new lancets for each patient. Never re-use lancets. 

1.5.3 Always label the glass slides with patient’s name, date and time of collection before taking a blood ﬁlm. 

1.5.4 Hold the patient’s left: hand and select the third ﬁng__ from the thumb; for infants, use the left big toe. 

1.5.5 Clean the ball of ﬁnger/toe with a piece of cotton soaked with 70% alcohol, using ﬁrm strokes to remove grease and dirt. 

1 .5.6 Puncture the ball of the ﬁnger/toe with a sterile lancet, using a quick rolling action. 

1.5.7 Apply gentle pressure to the ﬁnger/toe to express the ﬁrst drop of blood and wipe it. away with a dry piece of cotton wool. 

1.5-8 Work quickly and handle clean slides only by the edges, collect the blood as follows: 

1.5.8.1 For thin ﬁlm, apply gentle pressure to the ﬁnger and collect a single drop of blood on the middle of the slide. Get another slide to be used as spreader. Rapidly push the slide forward in a single smooth continuous motion. 

1.5.8.2 For thick blood ﬁlm, apply further pressure to express more blood. on the slide about 1 cm more from the drop intended for thin ﬁlm. With one corner of the spreader slide quickly join the 2—3 drops of blood out in a circular motion to make a circle the diameter of 1 cm. ﬁnishing off at the center. 

1.5.8.3 Wipe the remaining blood away from the ﬁnger with a cotton ball. 

1.5.9 Air-dry the blood ﬁlm. 

1.5.10 Label the upper 1/3 thick portion of the thin blood ﬁlm with the patient’s name, slide number and date of collection using a lead pencil 

1.6 Blood smears collection shall be done by a Field Assistant Worker or a barangay health worker trained on blood smear cellection. All smears shall be examined by a medical technician/ BHW trained in a DOH malaria microscopy training. Results shall be provided within 48-72 hours and reported to the RHU. Positive cases shall be provided with treatment immediately by the trained health worker. 

1.7 Direct Observation Therapy DOT) principle shall be adopted as mode of treatment of all patients supervised by a trained health worker, BHW or treatment partner; follow up smears shall be collected in days 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28 from positive cases. 

1.8 MBS with the use of Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT) is recommended in very hard to reach areas Where follow up visit is nearly impossible. Only trained BHW or village volunteer workers should carry out the RDT. The use of RDT for MBS can detect positive cases immediately and treatment can be given on the site. 

1.9 Blood smears shall be taken in all cases which are negative in case of use of RDT for MBS. 

2. Epidemiological Investigation after the MBS 

2.1 Conﬁrmed malaria cases shall be investigated to determine when and where the case contracted the present infection. 

2.2 Cases shall be classiﬁed in one of the following categories: 

a. IMPORTED as shown by the tracing of the case to a locality outside the area in question (either from abroad or from within the country) 

b. RELAPSING, i.e. a relapse of a pre-existing infection, as shown by the history of the case and the absence of any associated case in the neighborhood. 

c. INDIGENOUS, when it is neither of the above nor by blood transﬁrsion. 

3. Mass Blood Surveys in Evacuation Sites, Development or Industrial sites 

3.1 Mass blood surveys shall be done when a statistically signiﬁcant population moves from a malaria-endemic area to less endemic areas such as evacuation sites, development or industrial sites. 

3.2 Blood smears shall be collected from at least 90% non- residents/entrants particularly those coming from endemic or even sporadic transmission areas. 

3 .3 Where biosafety in handling blood specimens and disposal of infectious wastes shall be ensured, medical technicians/laboratory technicians, barangay microscopist and BHWs are advised to observe the procedures speciﬁed in section B, 1.4 of this guidelines. 

3.4 Blood smears shall be collected by a Field Assistant Worker or a trained health worker counterpart of the DOH to the Disaster Risk Reduction Management Council. 

3.5 All blood smears shall be examined for malaria parasites by a medical technician or a BHW trained in malaria microscopy. Results shall be provided within 48—72 hours and reported to the RHU. Positive cases shall be provided with appropriate malaria drugs. 

3.6 Direct Observation Therapy (DOT) shall be adopted as the mode of treatment of all patients supervised by a trained health worker, BHW or a treatment partner. Follow up smears shall be collected at days 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28 from positive cases 

Reporting: 

4.1 Mass Blood Survey reports should be computed separately from regular annual blood examination rates and slide positivity rates. The population covered in these cases should be taken as separate cohorts and reported accordingly. 

The reports shall consist of the following: 

4.1.1 Total number of smears taken as compared to the original targeted population 

4.1.2 Total slide positivity rate 
Computed as: no. of positive cases x 100 no. of slides collected 

4.1.3 Total slide positivity rate among symptomatic 
Computed as: no. of positive cases among symptomatic x 100 no. of slides collected from symptomatic 

4.1.4 Total slide positivity rate among asymptomatic 
Computed as: no. of positive cases among asymptomatic x 100 no. of slides collected from asymptomatic 

4.1.5 Total number of malaria conﬁrmed cases (by NIBS) treated Computed as: no. of all treated conﬁrmed cases x 100 no. of total conﬁrmed cases 

4.1.6 Total number of cases completely cured (negative malaria smear on day 28) 
Computed as: no. of completelv cured (negive smears on day 28) x 100 no. of total positive cases treated /I/) 

4.2 Reports on the above shall be submitted to the RHU to serve as basis for vector control (distribution of nets and or application of residual sprays) interventions in the evacuation sites. 

V. DOH ETHICS REVIEW 

5.1 The implementation of this policy shall adhere to the DOH Ethics Review guidelines. 

VI. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES: 

1. DOH — NCDPC- lDO 

a. Conduct orientation of concerned CHD regional malaria coordinators on the new policy in the conduct of mass blood survey. Conduct orientation and provide technical assistance in the training of BHWs/volunteer health workers in the conduct of mass blood survey 

b. To facilitate development of workplans of action. 

c. Allocate ﬁrnds to augment logistic requirements in the conduct of mass blood survey. 

2. Center for Health Development (CHD) 

a. Orient the PHOs and MHOs on the new policy in the conduct of mass blood survey 

b. Assist the PHOs/MHOs in the preparation of their plans of actions. 

c. Advocate among LGUs to allocate ﬁmds for hiring health workers to conduct mass blood surveys. 

d. To lobby [allocate for resources necessary for mass blood surveys. 

e. Identify provinces or areas needing ﬁu'ther conduct of mass blood surveys. 

f. Submit speciﬁc reports to the DOH-IDO summary of provinces or areas where mass blood surveys have been carried out. 

3. Provincial Health Ofﬁces (PHOs) 

a. Advocate among LGUs to adopt the new policy in the conduct of mass blood survey. 

b. Assist municipalities in the actual conduct of mass blood surveys. 

c. Provide assistance to municipalities in carrying out mass blood surveys 

d. Submit report to the CHD of mass blood surveys carried out. 

4. Municipal Health Officers (MHOs) 

a. Implement new policy on mass blood survey. 

b. Ensure proper collection, preparation, labeling, drying and ﬁxing of malaria blood ﬁlms to produce high quality, standardized specimens for microscopy.

c.Implement biosafety in the conduct of mass blood survey. 

d. Provide treatment of positive cases. Do follow up of positive cases on day 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28. 

Collate data and submit reports as required to the PHO. 

5. Barangay Health Workers 

a. Assist in information and education campaign regarding 100% population coverage in mass blood survey. 

b. Advocate to the community the relevance of mass blood survey. 

c. Assist in the DOT mode of treatment of positive cases. 

d. Do follow up of positive cases on day 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28. 

VII. REPEALING CLAUSE: 

Provisions from previous and related issuances inconsistent or contrary with the provision of this Administrative Order are hereby revised, modiﬁed and rescinded accordingly. All other provisions of existing issuances which are not affected by this 

Administrative Order shall remain valid and in effect. 

VIII. EFFECTIVITY: 

This Order shall take effect immediately. 

</body>
<sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

