Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>11/29/2012</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>NO. 2012 - 0026</docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines in the Conduct of Malaria Border Operations </subject>
<body>


I. RATIONALE 

Malaria remains a public health concern in the Philippines, being ranked as the 9tll leading cause of major disease nationwide. Of the 81 provinces 57 are still malaria-endemic while 24 have been declared malaria— free. As of 2008, only 5 provinces remain highly endemic, while promising results have been reported as well in other categories of provinces. 

Malaria prevention and control measures have since been designed and planned according to the epidemiological situations of each locality. The endemic localities have been assessed in terms of the vector dynamics, human behaviors, and ecological conditions and classiﬁed into strata areas sharing similar characteristics. These are stable, unstable, sporadic and malaria-prone areas. Sporadic transmission areas are in the elimination phase While malaria- prone areas are in the maintenance phase. There is a need to halt transmission in sporadic transmission areas where a possibility of onward transmission from an adjacent endemic municipality or barangay and malaria-prone areas should be prevented to have a re—introduction of cases frOm an introduced case of a neighboring area. Border operations may be adOpted to halt transmission and prevent re-introduction of cases. 

Malaria border operations consist of a set of preventive measures conducted simultaneously between two or more geographical areas. The aim of these activities is to reduce or stOp the introduction/reintroduction of cases and the continuous local transmission of malaria. It should be conducted regularly between areas where malaria is a common problem (either regularly or irregularly). 

The principle behind malaria border operations is to determine the problem and its causes between the areas and develop strategic plan for appropriate intervention based on current 

situation and what is needed based on data, followed by implementing the activities between areas simultaneously to maximize the direct or indirect effect of the intervention such as" reduction of mosquito vector density and reduction of the circulating parasite pool. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This Order shall set the guidelines in the conduct of malaria border operations to halt transmission of cases and prevent intrOduction/re- introduction of cases between areas in all stratiﬁed areas. 

III. SCOPE and COVERAGE: 

This Order shall apply to all health workers in the national, regional, municipal and barangay ofﬁcials whose functions contribute in the conduct of malaria border operatiOns. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS: 


1. Active Case Detection (ACD) is an approach in malaria surveillance requiring a regular house to  house visit by a health staff or volunteer workers aggressively looking for fever cases. 

2. Imported malaria case is a malaria case, the origin of which can be traced to a known malarious area outside the locality in which the case was detected and diagnosed. 

3. Indigenous malaria case is a malaria case, the origin from local transmission cannot be disproved 

4. Information, Education and Communication (IEC) refers to materials and promotional supplements to help improve people’s knowledge and health-seeking behavior on malaria, increasing the community’s involvement in case detection, treatment and other preventive measures and strengthen local ofﬁcials and other stakeholders’ support to malaria prevention, and control. 

5. Long-lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLIN) is a factory-treated mosquito net with netting material that has insecticide incorporated within or bound around ﬁbers. It repels, prevents blood feeding and/or kills mosquitoes after contact as a result of the presence of insecticide on the netting material. 

6. Malaria-prone areas are areas with no more indigenous malaria case in the last 5 years even in the presence of the malaria vector.


7. Mass Blood Survey (MBS) is an approach in malaria surveillance which refers to examination of blood ﬁlm from every person through microscopy in a community or group of coMunities in a population of an area for the purpose of identifying the individual cases with parasites or carriers of parasites who are not seen. 


8. Sporadic transmission areas are areas with at least one indigenous malaria case anytime in the past ﬁve years. 

9. Stable transmission are "areas with continuous presence of at least one indigenous malaria case in a month for six months during the past three years. 

10. Unstable transmission areas are areas with at least one malaria indigenous case in a month for less than six months during the past three years. 

11. Vector control are measures directed against the vector of the disease intended to limit its ability to transmit the disease. Indoor residual spraying is a vector control measure which is almethod of applying insecticide with a hand-compression spraycan on the inner wall surfaces and ceilings, underside of roofs and eaves of all houses in a given. area in order to kill the adult mosquito vectors that land and rest on these treated surfaces. ' 

V. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINE: 

A. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

Malaria is a public health cOncern and therefore the national, regional, provincial, city, municipal health workers and local health ofﬁcials shall have the responsibility to prevent the re—introduction of cases and halt transmission in low endemic and other stratiﬁed areas. 

The Malaria Control Program is moving towards elimination and maintenance phase and shall require a set of malaria-preventive activities between two or more contiguous areas to reduce or stop the introduction of cases and continuous local transmission of diseases in-areas with no more cases. 

A malaria border operations team shall be constituted in the municipal health ofﬁces to include a vector control team and a diagnostic team, together with the Provincial and Regional Malaria Coordinators. The vector control team shall have one squad leader and at least 4 spraymen depending upon the number of houses to be sprayed; the diagnostic team shall be composed of blood smear collectors and a medical technologist or microscopist. Health education and information campaign can be a built-in responsibility of the vector control and diagnostic teams. 

Malaria. border operations are resorted to when there is occurrence of cases both indigenous and imported; the mosquito vector is present; permanence or mobility'of population and regular access to regular malaria care services. . 

B. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES: 

1. Malaria border operations shall be done between barangays in the same municipality, or between barangays of two or more municipalities of different provinces within the same region or between barangays of different municipalities of different provinces of different regions or between barangays of two or more municipalities of the same province. 

2. It shall be conducted but not exclusively in far-ﬂung areas not regularly reached by health care services or in areas which may be accessible but the population cannot easily be reached on a regular basis. 

3. Different situations where border operations shall be conducted. 

Situation A: 

a. Area 1 is stable or unstable or sporadic 

b. Area 2 1S also stable, unstable or sporadic 

c. Breeding areas are found between the two areas and within the ﬂight range of the vector 

d. Vector control measures and diagnostic (blood smear collection) and treatment of cases are recommended. 

Situation B: 
a. Area 1 is stable or unstable (with indigenous case) 

b. Area 2 has no indigenous cases but irregularly have imported cases due to movement of people between 1 and 2 areas but no indigenous ease 

c. Vector control 1s recommended 1n area 1; case detection and treatment of case; 

d. Assess the need for vector control 1n area 2. 

Situation C: 

a. Area 1 is stable, unstable or sporadic 

b. Area 2 is has imported cases from area 1 

c. Secondary caSes occur from imported cases introduced from unstable or sporadic transmission areas 

d. Vector control, case detection and treatment of cases and IEC are recommended in both areas. 

4.Planning 

4.1 Determine the number of migrant population; track their movements to malaria-endemic areas and back to previous residence. 

4.2 Determine geographical source of infection to know the appropriate vector control intervention; IRS shall be the supplemental vector control measure in areas with stable transmission with no improvement in malaria despite high LLIN coverage or in areas where LLIN is not culturally acceptable; or LLIN as the main vector control measure in stable and unstable transmission areas. 

4.3 Determine Whether ACD or MBS shall be done for case detection 

4.4 Treatment adapting DOT 

4.5 Plan for continuous IEC 

4.6 Determine number of LLINs if needed 

4.7 Determine the laboratory supplies depending upon the population and method of case detection. 

4.8 Compute for the insecticide requirement for house spraying: 

a. Determine the number of target houses and type of insecticide. 

b. Total number of houses multiplied by l sachet if Alphacypermethrin 5% WP, Bifenthrin 10% WP, Cyﬂuthrin 10% WP, Deltqmthrin 2.5 % %WP is used; for Etofenprox 20% WP multiply number of houses by 2 sachets of 50gms. 

c. For computation of vector control component: Assume: 900 total target houses, divide by 8 (no. of houses per sprayman per day = 112.5 days; 112.5 days divide by 10 days (target no. of spraying days) = 12 spray persons or 3 teams (4 spraymen per team) 12 spray persons plus 3 squad leaders = 15 personnel 

5. Implementation 

The Provincial Health Ofﬁce in coordination with the Municipal Health Ofﬁce in the respective border operatiOn areas shall lead the implementation of the activity considering the following;  

5.1 Timing of activity or activities 

5.2 Synchronize activities between areas to maximize direct or indirect effects of the intervention 

5.3 Proper recording using the sprayman’s report form and report form for blood I smear collection 5.4 Submit reports to the Municipal Health Ofﬁce en-route to the Provincial ' Health Ofﬁce and the Regional Health Ofﬁce 

6. Social Mobilization 

6.1 The community shall be informed about the activities; schedule and what ' needs to be done before carrying out the a.ctivity 

6.2 Conduct a meeting with the barangay/ local ofﬁcials and request for their participation 

6.3 Clarify that blood smear collection to know the number of people in the community with malaria parasites and he number to be given anti-malaria drugs; indoor residual spraying and or distribution of LLINs shall be carried out to reduce the malaria vector population and or prevent mosquito ' bites to people in the community. 

6.4 Inform that we expect them to assist in information, education and communication for prevention and control of malaria in their respective barangay. 

6.5 To maintain the status of what has been attained, a follow-up of the people’s health-seeking behavior by checking on the number of people seeking conSultations; regular use of the LLINs or maintain the sprayed wall surfaces shall be carried out. 

7. Reporting 

7.1 The Center for Health Development shall submit to the Central Ofﬁce reports of provinces or areas where border operatiOns have been carried out. 

7.2 The PrOvincial Health Ofﬁce shall submit to the CHD report of areas where border operations have been carried out. I 


7.3 The Municipal Health Ofﬁce shall submit to the PrOvincial Health Ofﬁce, the number of blood smears collected, number positive for malaria and given anti-malaria drugs. Report of follow up smears of positive cases on days 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28 days Shall likewise be incorporated. 

7.4 The Barangay Health Worker shall assist in adopting the Direct Observe Treatment (DOT) mode of treatment of positive cases detected during border operations by acting as treatment partner.  


C. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES: 

1. DOH — NCDPC- IDO shall: 

a. Orient concerned CHD regional malaria coordinators on the conduct of malaria border Operations. Provide technical assistance in the different situations where malaria border operations are needed. 

b. Facilitate development of workplans of action. 
c. Allocate funds to augment logistic requirements in the conduct of border operations. 

Centers for Health Development (CHDs) shall: 

a. Orient the PHOs and MHOs on the conduct of malaria border operations. 

b. Assist the PHOs/MHOs in the preparation of their plans .of action

c. Advocate among LGUs to allocate funds for hiring health workers to conduct border operations. 


d. Allocate necessary resources for border operations. 

e. Identify provinces 'or areas needing further conduct of border operations. 

3. Provincial Health Ofﬁces (PHOs) shall: 

a. Advocate among LGUs to conduct malaria border operations.

b. Assist municipalities in the actual conduct of malaria border operations.

c. Provide assistance to municipalities in carrying out border operations. 



4. Municipal Health Ofﬁcers (MHOs) shall: 

a. Implement border operations in areas where it is needed. 

b. Ensure proper collection, preparation, labeling, drying and ﬁxing of malaria blood ﬁlms to produce high quality, standardized specimens for microscopy. 

c. Implement biosafety in the conduct of case detection. _ Provide treatment of positive cases. Do follow-up of positive cases on day 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28. 

5. Barangay Health Workers shall: 

a. Assist in information and education campaign regarding compliance to vector control measures to be carried out. 

b. Advocate to the community the relevance of border operations. 

c. Collect follow-up bloOd smears from positive cases on day3, 7, 14, 21 and 28 days after giving the treatment drugs. 

VI. REPEALING CLAUSE: 

Provisions from previous and related iSsuances inconsistent or contrary with the provision of this Administrative Order are hereby revised, modiﬁed and rescinded accordingly. All other provisions of existing issuances which are not affected by this Administrative Order 

shall remain valid and In effect. 

VII. EFFECTIVITY: 

This order shall take effect immediately. 

</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


