Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>10/01/2012</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2012 — 0018 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Operational Guidelines of Administrative Order No. 2012-0005, “National Policy on Climate Change Adaptation for the Health Sector” </subject>
<body>


1. RATIONALE: 

Considering the signiﬁcant contribution that climate change adaptation strategies for health can do to support the attainment of Kalusugan Pangkalahatan (Universal Health Care) with its three main thrusts of ﬁnancial risk protection, facilities enhancement and achievement of the millennium development goals, the Department of Health recently issued an Administrative Order 2012-0005 for its National Policy On Climate Change Adaptation for the Health Sector that lays down its plans based on the National Framework Strategy. 

Supplementary to this, the Operational Guidelines are being set forth to direct all health ofﬁces and stakeholders on how they will transform the identiﬁed strategies to concrete activities, to mainstream these into their existing programs as a response to the health impacts of climate change. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This directive is being issued to provide speciﬁc guidelines on operationallizing Administrative Order No. 2012-0005 known as the National Policy on Climate Change Adaptation for the Health Sector. 

Speciﬁc Objectives: 

1. To develop procedures on how to implement the strategies. 
2. To identify the roles of key stakeholders. 
3. To develop procedures on the mobilization of funds for CCAH. 4. To develop monitoring and evaluation procedures. 

III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE 

This applies to all DOH ofﬁces — Central Ofﬁce, Centers for Health Development, Retained Health Facilities, Attached Agencies and relevant DOH managed CC related programs and projects. This shall also apply to Local Government Units (LGUS), N011 - Government Organizations (NGOs), professional organizations, private sector and Other relevant partners involved in the implementation of climate Change adaptatiOn for health programs. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

A. “Acceptable levels” refers to the level at which a health risk is reduced for the body to perform its normal levels of defense over time.

B. “Adaptation” refers to the adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected Climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneﬁcial Opportunities. 

C. “Adaptation beneﬁts” refers to the gains that accrue to the population by adapting to the potential adverse impacts of climate change 

D. “Climate Change” refers to a change in climate that can be identiﬁed by changes in the mean and/or variability of its properties and that persists for an extended period, typically decades or longer, whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity. 

E. “Climate change adaptation for health” refers to national and local health responses to improve Community and health System resilience to adapt to the public health  challenges and health risks posed by climate change. 

F. “Climate change proof refers to a process of identifying and reducing'health risks as a consequence of climate change, and ensuring that those risks are reduced to. acceptable levels through long- lasting and environmentally sound, economically viable, and socially acceptable modiﬁcations. 

G. “Climate Sensitive diseases (CSD)” are those diseases and health risks that are inﬂuenCed by seasonal and extreme changes in temperature and rainfall. These CSDs include but are not limited to vector-home diseases such as malaria, leishmaniasis and " I dengue fever, 'diarrhoeal diseases like cholera, viral diseases like Rift-valley fever, malnutrition and food-borne infections and negative health conditions related to air, pollution and extreme temperatures. 

H. “Disaster” refers to a serious disruption of the functioning of a community'or a society involving widespread human, material, economic or environmental losses and impacts which exceed the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources. 

I.“Disaster risk reduction” (DRR) refers to the concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic efforts to analyze and manage the causal factors of disaSters, including through reduced exposure to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise management of land and the environment, and improved preparedness for adverse events. 

J. A “Global Warming” refers to the increase in the average temperature of the Earth’s near-surface air and oceans that is associated with the increased concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

K. “Greenhouse gases” (GHG) refers to constituents of the atmosphere that centribute to the greenhouse effect including, but not limited to, carbon'dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydroﬂuordcarbons, perﬂuorocarbons and sulfur hexaﬂuoride. 

L. “Health Sector” refers to both the public and private health sectors which contribute to the overall public health outcomes as deﬁned by the Department of Health. 

M. “Health system” consists of all the organizations, institutions, resources and people ' whose primary purpose is to improve health. Strengthening health Systems means addressing key constraints related to health WOrker stafﬁng, infrastructure, health commodities (such as equipment and medicines), logistics, tracking progress and” effective ﬁnancing. It is the sum total of all the organizations, institutions and resources whose primary purpose is to improve health. 

N. “Mainstreaming” refers to the integration of policies ”and measures thataddress - climate change into development planning and Sect oral decision-making. 

O. “Mitigation” in” the context of climate change, refers to human intervention to address anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of- all GHG, including ozone-depleting substances and their Substitutes. 

P. “Vulnerability” refers to the degree to which a system is Susceptible to, 0r unable to cope with, the adverse effects of Climate change, including climate variability and - extremes. 

Q. “Service delivery system”- in the context of climate change refers” to a coodinative. approach for health services to be provided in an efﬁcient and timely manner so as to respond to the potential CC adverse effects on health.

R. “Standardized measurement System” in the context of climate change refers to a required set of procedures that helps benchmark and measure the level of quality of activities and their corresponding CC indicators. 


GENERAL GUIDELINES A. Strategy 1: Policy, Plans and Partnerships  

1. Health Policy,Plans and Programs I 

a. Formulation of anannual policy agenda-shall be done to ensure that all relevant I and required policy issuances on Climate Change (CC) are instituted. 


”Corresponding policy development manual and guides for LGUs shall be prepared to assist in making relevant CC policies. 

b. All DOH concerned ofﬁce-,s health facilities, attached agencies and Other instrumentalities or sectors shall be oriented on how to integrate CC into their  annual plans and programs.

c. Local Government Units shall include climate change adaptation and health activities in their city wide investment plans for health (CIPH) as well as- province wide inveStment plans for health (PIPH). 

d. LGUs shall formulate ordinances that will strengthen the implementation of . climate change and health programs in support to climate change act and this Administrative Order. 

2. Standards and Regulation 

a. A standardized metric system for climate change and health shall be developed for the management of all the various climate change. and health indicators, adaptation and mitigation measures that have adaptation beneﬁts.  

b. Regulations for health facilities, technologies and products shall utilize an evidence 4 based approach to assess adaptation and mitigation measures that have adaptation beneﬁts. A one stop proceSsing for accreditation, licensing and certiﬁcation for health facilities, technologies and products shall be developed. 

3. Networking and Partnership-Building 

a. Partner agencies shall be identiﬁed and a memorandum of understanding will be forged to support the implementation of projects and activities of the Philippine Climate Change Adaptation Plan for Health. 

b. Institutional partners will be mapped and a directory shall be made as well as a recognition system of LGUs with the mest reported cases of climate- sensitive diseases.

c. Regular multi-sectoral meetings shall be conducted to discuss and resolve I issues related to climate change and health. Project proposals developed for Climate change and health program Shall be presented to interested development partners for their consideration. 

4. Resource Mobilization 

a. Human resources that can effectively and efﬁciently respond to the health impacts of climate change shall be identiﬁed and included in the directory of experts. 

b. Health technologies that can respond to climate Change adaptation and mitigation measures that have adaptation beneﬁts shall be identiﬁed, developed _ and disseminated to the public. 

c. Alternative ﬁnancing and criteria for facilities and sectors that will engage in ﬁnancial risk protection for the potential and actual effects of climate change on health shall be developed. A beneﬁt-package for climate- sensitive diseases I shall be developed. 

d. Project proposals shall be developed for consideration of LGUS, private sector donor agencies and development partners.

B. Strategy II: Service Provision, Capacity and Infrastructure Enhancement 

1. Service Provision 

a. Identiﬁcation and integration of the CC and health adaptation measures into the health delivery system including standards for CC and health adaptation shall be done. 

b. Existing health service delivery packages shall integrate CC and health adaptation measures. 

c. Develop appropriate CC health service delivery packages for emerging climate related diseases. 

2. Capability Building 

a. Integrate CC and health capability building into existing health human resource development plans and programs. 

b. Improve the capacities of health facilities at all levels on Climate Change and I Health adaptation. 

c. Review and identify training needs of health workers and develop appropriate training module as part of the training System.

d. Conduct capability building with training of trainers for local CC and health adaptation strategies and activities including Health Vulnerability and Capability Assessment (HVACA). 

3. Facilities Enhancement 

a. Integrate CC adaptation and health into the existing structural, non-structural and functional criteria for upgrading of hospitals and other health facilities to make them climate change resilient in accordance with existing DOH guidelines. 

b. Develop standards for climate-resilient health facilities.   

C. Strategy III: HealthPromotion, Research,Surveillance and Monitoring 

1. Health Promotion and Advocacy 

a. Develop a CC and health communication system. that Will I use Behavior Change Communications (BCC) to include risk communication. 

b. Conduct advocacy and communication planning to enable the public in all settings to be informed and prepared for climate change related emergencies and disasters.

c. Develop and disseminate prototypes of IEC materials.   

2. Research and Development 

a. Ensure inclusion of the CC and health with the DOH research agenda. 

b. Conduct research to include but not limited to health vulnerability and capability assessment (HVACA), baseline surveys, health impact studies of climate change, cost-beneﬁt analysis, and impact of climate change on health infrastructure. 

c. Partnership with academe on the acnduct of research on CC adaptatiOn and health shall be done. 
3. Information Management System-and Surveillance 

a. Integrate climate change related disease reporting into existing surveillance systems.  

b. Develop asystem for-correlation and analysis of meteorological parameters _and'climate Sensitive diseases for program implementation including buttnot limited to the Philippine Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (PIDSR), Surveillance in Post Extreme Emergencies and Disasters (SPEED), Health Emergency and Reporting System (HEARS), Online National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (ONEISS), Event-based SurVeillance and Response (ESR) System. 

c. Collect program related reports through DOH ofﬁces with climate change I related disease interventions. 

d. Develop a website for climate change and health and publish relevant- information that can promote adaptation on the impact of climate change on health. 

4. Monitoring and Evaluation 

a. Develop CC and health indicators to be integrated into existing monitoring tools

b. Monitor and evaluate the progress and Outcome of the National/ Local Climate  Change Action Plan for Health, HVACA/ LGU scorecards and related outputs annually/Semi- annually. 

c. Feedback monitoring and evaluation results to concerned DOH ofﬁces and LGUS. 

d. Document lessons learned and share good practices on CC  and health adaptation. 

D. Strategy 4: Strengthening Organizational Structure for climate change at different levels of governance 

1. Organizational structure 

a. All health prowgrams ofﬁces and facilities shall adopt and mainstream the Climate Change Adaptation for Health Pro gram in the health system. It shall be led bythe Heads of Ofﬁce or representatiVes to assure mainstreaming action plans and corresponding decisions. 

b. A climate change focal person shall be designated in all DOH ofﬁces and facilities. Direct technical Coordination will be done with the-Central ofﬁce Climate Change Unit(CCU) supervisor during adaptation reSpo'nses for : climate change, while administratively, being accountable to their respect1ve ofﬁces.

c. Based on the strategic activities, organizational structures shall be established, With delineatiOn of roles and responsibilities, and identiﬁcation of areas of coordination and collabOration among all health stakeholders for climate change adaptation activities. 

v1. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE 

A. National Structure 

Under the Inter-Agency Committee for Environmental Health (IACEH) chaired by the Secretary of the Department of Health per Executive Order No 489 of 1991, the - Climate Change Adaptationfor Health (CCAH) Sector shall be created by virtue of an IACEH Resolution; designating the Department of Health, represented by the Cluster Head — Support to Service Delivery, and the Climate Change Commission, epresented by the Executive Director as co-chairs. The CCAH meetings'shall be alternately convened and presided by both agencies. Composed of core staff from agencies, other government and non- government agencies, professional ocieties, academe, other public and private se,ctors it shall be responsible for deveIOping and implementing a National Action Plan for Climate Change Adaptation for Health.

1. Sub-committees shall be organized corresponding to the three (3) Strategic areas. of the DOH National Policy on CCAH Sector as necessary. According to speciﬁc areas of involvement, the sub—committees shall comprise sector representatives and DOH program managers. In coordination With the regional and local implementing committees, it shall be responsible for program monitoring and evaluation based on their respective priority areas. 

2. There shall be a secretariat composed of personnel from the Climate Change 

Unit under the National Center for Disease PreventiOn and Control and Climate Change Commission staff. It shall be responsiblefor coordinating the meetings, preparation of agenda, and documenting the minutes of the meeting. 

B. Regional Structures 

Program strategies and activities undertaken at .the regional level shall bemanaged by the CCAH sub-sector under the Regional Inter-Agency Committee for Environmental Health or byexi'sting committees that can absorb this function. The Composition and organizational arrangements shall correspond to the IACEH-CCAH sub-Sector. The CHD will designate. a regional focal person to coordinate with the RIACEH—CCAH in the formulation of CCA plans. The CCU shall coordinate the submission of CHD plans for CCAH to N.CDPC For CCAH without immediate regional counterparts, other stakeholders Shall be encouraged to be involved.  

C. Provincial and Local Structures 

Program implementation shall be carried out at the provincial, city, municipal and barangay levels. The composition and organizational arrangements Shall relate to the RIACEH— CCAH and the CHD focal point. Each corresponding level shall be under the leadership of the local chief executives. For CCAH without immediate local counterparts, other stakeholders shall be encouraged to be involved. 

VII. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

A. National Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC) Environmental and Occupational Health OfﬁCe (EOHO) 

1. Review and update existing protoCols and standards in support to CC-related disease prevention and management. 

2. Provide necessary logistics augmentation Support to LGUS, through CHDS, in the I I” . implementation of CC -responSIive services. 

3. Provide technical asSistance in the dissemination of CC-responsive standards and protocols and technologies 

4. Direct the Climate Change Unit (CCU) 1n the management of CC pro grams 

B. Climate Change Unit (CCU) 

1. Develop the climate change agenda for health and provide technical assistanCe in its operationalization. 

2. Set policies and standards for CCAH.

3. Develop tools necessary for the implementation of CCAH initiatives. 

4. Act as technical advisers/reSource persons to CC and Health related conferences, training, seminars etc., and as coordinators of capability building efforts on CC and Health.

5. Serve as a secretariat to the IACEH pertinent to CC sector. ' 

6. Monitor and evaluate progress of implementation of Climiate Change for Health A policies, plans and initiatives. 

7. Develop criteria, mechanisms for interagency public sector and private Sector partnership and conduct public private partnership forums for climate change and health. 

8. Liaise with other goVemment agencies and groups of stakeholders on relevant CC I and Health concerns or initiatives.

9. Conduct evidence based research and development for CCAH. 

C. National Center for Health Promotion (NCHP) 

1. Design and assess communication and health promotion Schemes addreSsing various - groups of stakeholders, including the popularization among local decision makers and , planners of CC best practices and innovative schemes. 

2. Develop effective mechanisms to promote the Climate Change Adaptation for Health.

3. Provide technical assistance to CHDS, LGUS and other stakeholders in developing. locally-Speciﬁc communication and health promotion packages. 

4. Help promote public- -private partnership to synergize resources for climate change and health. 

D. Bureau of Quarantine 

1. To develop quarantine standards and procedures for health particularly brought by Climate Change related diseases that may impact public health concern. 

E. Bureau of Health Facilities and Services 

1 Identify standards and licensing requirements to “Climate Change-proof?” healthcare facilities. 

2. Develop and implement a training program for "climate-prooﬁng” health care faCilities. 


3. Assess the vulnerability of health care facilities on the effects of climate change and recommend appropriate interventions. 

4. Develop guidelines for a CC preparedness plan for healthcare facilities. 

5. Coordinate health ﬁnancing in CC for utilization of healthcare facilities with PhilHealth. 

F. Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau (HPDPB) I 
1. Facilitate formulation of sectoral policies supporting CC.

2. Facilitate the review and updating of policies and plans in support of CCAPH. 

3. Provide Support in the enhancement of guidelines in support of the CCAPH. 

4. Facilitate decision making and planning for the CCAPH with the timely dissemination of evidences thru health policy notes. 

5. Initiate the development of the research agenda forclimate change and health. 

G. Bureau of International Health Cooperation (BIHC) 

1. Organize Health Partners Meeting to discuss Issues and actions on climate change and In health.‘ 

2. Facilitate inter-country coordination mechanisms and tap international networks for information exchange on climate‘change and health. 

3. Help promote public—private partnership to synergize reSOurceS for climate change and health. 

4. Coordinate international funding sources for CC and Health. 

H. Health Human Resource Development Bureau (HHRDB) 

1. Provide technical assistance to. concerned DOH ofﬁces in the development of training module/learning materials and conduct of capability building activities on CC and health. 

2. Establish a directory and build partnerships with academe and other learning institutions to provide CC and Health Training Programs. 

3. Develop learning materials/courses With academe and other learning institutions. 

4. Review existing training module/manualslon Climate Change and health. 

5. Provide technical assistance in the. development of modules, training, monitoring/evaluation tools on the integrated science and art of the health aspects of climate change impacts for different health segments/ levels of health service providers. 

I. National Center for Health Facilities Development (NCHFD) 

1. Design the general principles and basic features to govern and. manage DOH funded facilities upgrades towards climate prooﬁng to increase climate resilience. 

2. Recommend models for health facilities infrastructure revenue generation and utilization to enhance climate prooﬁng facilities. 

3. Develop a minimum set of health facility, population, and emergency and disaster services for the LGUS. 

4. Develop and strengthen structural, non structural and fundtional criteria and coordinate with HEMS for constructing climate resilient health facilities. 

J. Bureau of Local Health Development (BLHD) 

1. Advocate for the integration of CC and Health activities in ; the P/CIPH/local operational plans according to recommendations from different programs and ofﬁces. 

2. Facilitate investment and operational planning as well as policy, research and legislative agenda development for the CC and Health with the Centers for Health DeVelopment (CHDs) and other instrumentalities. 

3. Integrate CC and A H indicators 1n the LGU scorecards


4. Assist in the promotion of public—private partnership to synergize resources for climate change and health.

K. National Epidemiology Center (NEC) 

1. Develop and maintain a disease surveillance system that can proVide early warning on the impact of climate change on diseases

2. Review and analyze climate indiCators that are relevant to the occurrence of climate sensitive diseases.  

3. Monitor and evaluate trends in climate-sensitive diseases. 

4. Conduct research/studies on CC and- Health. 

5. Utilize the Philippine Integrated Disease Surveillance and ResponSe (PIDSR), Surveillance in Post Extreme Emergencies and Disasters (SPEED), Health Emergency and Reporting System (HEARS), Online National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (ONEISS), as databases that will be installed to receive outputs from the local surveillance system.

6. Disseminate and train CHDS in Event- based surveillance and Response in the Community (ESRC) as a basis of this local surveillance system. 

7. In coordination with CCU and HEMS shall integrate indicators for 'climate' change _ and health for the following (ME3) Monitoring and Evaluation for Efﬁciency and Effectiveness as a basis for monitoring. 

L. Health Emergency Management Staff (HEMS)_ 

1. Continuous promotion and advocacy of DR and CCA 1n the health sector. 

2. Continuous enhancement of the capacity of the health sector to reduce riSkS and respond to public health emergencies.‘ 

3. Assistance 1n the promotion of Safe HOSpitals campaign in health facilities. 

4. Continuous implementation of early alert and warning system during emergencies and disasters. ' 

5. Regular monitoring of extreme Weather events and other climatological hazards and communication of health risks to the public. 

. 6. Institutionalization of health emergency management at the local level to increase I 'coMunity resilience. ' ' 

7. Coordination and collaboration with partners and stakeholders in DR and CCA-related preparedness, response and recovery activities. 

M. Centers for Health Development (CHD) 

1. Disseminate policy and provide technical assistance to local governments. 

2. Conduct regular CC preparedness implementation plan, coordination, and monitoring vis-a-vis other health programs. 

3. Adopt guidelines on how to integrate climate change adaptation and mitigation for health packages in the CIPH/PIPH. 

4. Promote public-private partnership to synergize resources for climate change and health. 

5. Monitor LGU performance on climate change and health program implementation. 

6. Advocate to LGU’S fOr mainstreaming CC. 

7. Prioritize the integration of CC science in the local policy development to ensure. targeted, ﬂexible and regionally Speciﬁc responses. 

8. Disseminate research ﬁndings and Other Best Practices relative to CC and Health 

9. Provide technical assistance and augment LGU resources for climate Change and health adaptation response mechanisms, ﬁnancing, programs and plans.  

10. Provide technical assistance, monitor LGU compliance and execute dissemination to local government units (LGUS) of the climate resilient health facilities standards. 

11. Provide technical assistance to LGUS and network with other agencies for the development of a unified communications plan for climate change and health. 

N. Local Government Units (LGUS) 

1. Coordinate with CHD for needed technical assistance to implement climate Change and health preparedness implementation plan. 

2. Coordinate With CHD for needed technical assistance to implement guidelines on how to integrate climate change adaptation and mitigation for health in the City/ Province— wide Investment Plans for Health (CIPH/PIPH). 

3. Coordinate with CHD for needed technical assistance to develop local public—private I partnerships to synergize resources for climate change and health. 

4. Ensure utilization of standards developed as part of their LGU climate change and health adaptation response. 

O. Attached agencies and other partners:

 A. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  

Develop regulatory measures for standards on food, drugs, ecsmetics, medical technology and devices and procedures in response to Climate change-related diseases. 

B. I National Nutrition Council (NNC) 

Integrate CC concerns in the development of NNC programs and policies in response to climate change.

C. Population Commission (POPCOM) 

Integrate CC concerns in the development of the Philippine Population Management Program. 

D. PhilHealth 

1. Develop a benefit package for accommodating treatment of climate—sensitive ' diseases. '

2. Develop/ integrate Quality Assurance bench book indicator for “climate- proofed” health facilities. 

E. Philippine Institute of Traditional and Alternative Health Care (PITAHC) 

1. Integrate Climate ChanCe Adaptation (CCA) and mitigation in their training programs. 

2. Develop and implement CCA guidelines and standards for herbal plants processing. 

F. NGOS and private Sector partners 

1. Participate 1n Climate change and health activities and plans. 

2. Support public-private partnerships for climate change and health. 

3. Mobilize counterpart resources climate change and health 

4. Coordinate with-Public sector partners for climate change and health activities. 

G. Academe and Professional Organizations 

1. Participate in climate change and health activities and plans. 

2. Provide technical and expert opinions based on researches done 

3. Support partnerships with Other professional and other educational institutions. 

VIII. BUDGET AND FUNDING 

In compliance to the RA. 9729 - Philippine Climate Change Act and R.A.10121— Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act, the Department of Health Shall allocate a corresponding budget based on the implementation plan of the CCAH. 

The DOH shall encourage the Local Government Units ”to fund their local CCAH plans and programs by providing the necessary technical asSistanCe. Likewise, the DOH shall encourage other health sector agencies to implement and fund CCAH In their respective Ofﬁces and establishments. 

IX. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

In the event that any pro'vision or part of this order is declared unauthOrized or rendered invalid by any Court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected by such declaration shall remain valid and effective. 

X. REPEALING CLAUSE: 

Unless otherwise, provisions from previous issuances and other related orders that are inconsistent or contrary to this orderare amended and repealed accordingly. 

XI. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect immediately. 
</body>

<sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

