Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>04/16/2013</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2013 - 0015 </docnum>
<subject>
SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE NEWBORN SCREENING DOH CHD AND ARMM 4% FUND UTILIZATION 
</subject>
<body>

1. Rationale 

To ensure sustainability of the National Comprehensive Newborn Screening System and subsequently reach the vision of saving all Filipino newborns from mental retardation and death, provision was made in Section 16 of the Republic Act 9288, otherwise known as the “Newborn Screening Act of 2004”, for the NBS fee to be divided and at least four percent (4%) be set aside for the DOH Centers for Health Development (CHDs) and Department of HealthAutonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (DOH—ARMM). The said fund shall be used solely for follow-up services, education and other activities directly related to the provision of newborn screening services. 

Furthermore, in consonance with this vision of saving Filipino newborns, preparation for the expansion of the newborn screening panel from six (6)5 to more than twenty (20) disorders is underway. 

As the expanded Newborn Screening will incur additional expenses, and since the newborn screening coverage remains below the 2010 national target of 85%, it was resolved, in the August 29, 2012 meeting of the Advisory Committee of the Newborn Screening (ACNBS) that the utilization of the 4% share of the DOH-CHDS and DOH— ARMM shall be reviewed and guidelines shall be set to ensure maximum and appropriate utilization of Newborn Screening Fund. In this light this Administrative Order is being issued. 

II. Objective 

To set the guidelines for the use of the 4% fund allotted to the DOH-CHDs and DOH- ARMM. 

III. Coverage 

Provisions of this Administrative Order shall apply to all DOH-CHDs, DOH-ARMM, and Newborn Screening Follow-up Clinics. 

 
IV. Definition of Terms 

Newborn Screening Follow -up Clinics refers to regional and provincial referral centers of all confirmed positive cases. 

Newborn Screening Center W8C) refers to a facility equipped with a newborn screening laboratory that complies with the standards established by the National Institutes of Health, and provides all required laboratory tests and recall/follow-up programs for newborns with heritable conditions. - 

Newborn Screening Reference Center (NSRC) refers to the central facility at the National Institutes of Health that defines testing and follow-up protocols, maintains an external laboratory proficiency testing program, oversees the national testing database and case registries, assists in training activities in all aspects of the program, oversees content of educational materials and acts as the Secretariat of the Advisory Committee on Newborn Screening. 

RA 9288: Newborn Screening Act of 2004 refers to :the act promulgating a comprehensive policy and a national system for ensuring newborn screening 

V. Policies and Procedures 

A. General Guidelines 

1. Memorandum of Agreement shall be executed between NSRC, NSCs and CHDstOH—ARMM on the collection and transfer of 4% of NBS fees; 

2. NSRC shall collect from NSCs the percentage of the NBS fees for CHDs/DOH- ARMM; 

3. NSRC shall notify the CHDs/DOH-ARMM on the availability of 4% of NBS fees; 

4. CHDstOH-ARMM shall request from NSRC the amount for transfer as indicated in the CHDs/DOH-ARMM Annual Internal Operating Budget (10B); 

5. The earmarked amount to CHDs/DOH—ARMM shall be for the purpose of implementing the newborn screening program and facilitating achievement of required outputs; 

6. CHDs/DOH-ARMM shall: a) maintain a Trust Fund account for the 4% earmarked amount; 

b) take charge of the overall management and disbursement of the transferred fund; 

c) submit to DOH National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (NCDPC) the required accomplishment reports; 

(1) prepare and submit to NSRC semi— annually the fund utilization report verified by the Commission on Audit (COA) Auditor which Shall form part of the attachment for succeeding request, 

7. NSRC shall: 

a) request funding and payment approval from UP Manila of the fund for transfer to CHDs/DOH-ARMM; 

b) transfer earmarked funds to CHDs/DOH-ARMM 30 working days from date of receipt of requests; 

8. NBS NurSe Coordinators shall be iii-charge in the monitoring of funds transferred to CHDs/DOH-ARMM; 

9. Transfer of funds for Capital Outlay is subject to special budget; 

10. All disbursement of funds shall be subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations. 

B. Speciﬁc Guidelines 

The 4% share of the DOH and DOH ARMM shall be used for the following NBS- related activities: 

1. Follow-up service of patients with positive screening result by personnel hired for the NBS unit based at CHDs/DOH-ARMM. 

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 

a) Salaries and Wages of Nurse and/or Medical Coordinator on contract of service; 

b) Traveling expenses of monitoring visits; 

c) Per diem of monitoring team; and 

d) Other related expenses. 

2. Follow—up service of patients confirmed positive by personnel hired for the NBS unit based at Newborn Screening Follow—up Clinics. 

The line item budget shall be used for the following: 

a) Salaries and Wages of Nurse/Genetic Counselor and/or Medical Coordinator on contract of service; 

b) Traveling expenses of monitoring visits/attendance to trainings/conferences; 

c) Per diem of monitoring team; 

d) Confirmatory testing for indigent patients; and. 

e) Other related expenses. 

3. Education and other activities directly related to the provision of NBS services. The budget line item shall be used for the following: 

a) Meetings with Newborn Screening Facilities’ Coordinators; 

b) Venue and food of participants during the conduct of lectures/trainings/orientation seminars; 

c) Supplies and materials needed for the conduct of lectures/trainings/orientation seminars; 

d) Honorarium of resource persons/facilitators; 

e) Traveling expenses and per diem for the conduct of training/orientation seminars; 

f) Printing and reproduction of advocacy and information materials; and 

g) Other training/ seminar and campaign related expenses. 

4. Incentives for RHU collecting health units AT LEASTQXQ of the money allocated to the CHDs/DOH—ARMM. 

Incentive may be in the form of:

a) "NBS kits; 
b) sponsorship to newborn screening -related meetings and conferences; 
c) promotional materials/giveaways or 
d) telecommunication expenses related to newborn screening activities 


5. Staff development of the personnel of the NBS unit based at the CHD/DOH- ARMM. 

The budget line item shall be used for the following: 

a) Registration fees of trainings/seminars/conventions/official meetings; 

b) Traveling and accommodation expenses; 

c) Per diem of staff directly involved in the program; and 

d) Attendance to international conferences approved by DOH-Screening & Evaluation Committee for Training & Development (SECTD). Approval shall be based on the following; 

(1) an ofﬁcial country representative involving a highly specialized ﬁeld that is related in the program management of policy development; and 
(2) the conference focus on newborn screening program management and policy development; and 
(3) paper or poster presenter/s on newborn screening-related services/innovation; or 
(4) oral presenter/invited resource person representing the country either in plenary or in parallel session. 

6. Capital outlay 

The budget line item shall be used for the following: 

a) Purchase Of Office Equipment, Communication Equipment, IT Equipment and Software, Furniture and Fixtures; 
b) Purchase of Motor Vehicle for NBS program; 

7. Maintenance and operating expenses of the program 

The budget line item shall be used for the following: 

a) Telephone bills/Call Cards (Landline and mobile phones); 

b) Office Supplies and Other Supplies Expenses; 

c) Internet Expenses; 

d) Representation Expenses; 

e) Repairs and Maintenance of acquired Properties & Equipment; and 

f) Other Administrative Overhead related expenses. 

8. Cost of repeat samples due to insufﬁcient and unsatisfactory samples of patients in their catchment area. 

These guidelines shall be reviewed periodically by NatiOna] Center for Disease Prevention and Control for technical processes, and Newborn Screening Reference Center for usage of fund. 

VI. Repealing Clause 

All issuance that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed/rescinded. 

VII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its approval and publication in the official gazette or newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>
 

