Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>08/14/2013</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2013 - 0023 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: GUIDELINES ON THE ESTABLISHMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF COLLABORATING CENTERS FOR MALARIA 
</subject>
<body>
 


I. RATIONALE 

The establishment of collaborating centers is designed to support the Malaria Program attain its goal of —free Philippines speciﬁcally to reduce the burden of malaria in areas where there is stable/unstable transmission and to sustain areas which has reached pre-elimination and elimination status. Further support the attainment of its commitment in the Millennium Development Goals. 

Collaborating centers when established shall provide: 1) a system for health human resource development in the fields of malaria diagnosis and treatment and malaria prevention through vector control; 2) a regular system of quality control in the implementation of malaria diagnostic and treatment services; 3) a system of quality control in the implementation of vector control activities. 4) a local center where quality of anti-malaria drugs may be tested; insecticides for resistance level of vector mosquitoes and Long-Lasting Insecticide—Treated Nets (LLITNs) may be tested for bio-efficacy. With these provisions from the collaborating centers, the quality of diagnostic and treatment capabilities shall be maintained and quality of vector control commodities such insecticides and LLINs shall be assessed to improve vector control measures. 

Establishment of collaborating centers shall allow availability and ready access to various forms of technical assistance services related to malaria utilizing human resources working in locally-based standard-compliant facilities strategically located along selected DOH regional offices. This initiative shall provide an opportunity to establish and implement a structure and system with which technical assistance package shall be made available. 

II. OBJECTIVES: 

This order shall set the guidelines in the establishment and implementation of collaborating centers in selected centers for health development. 

III. SCOPE AND COVERAGE: 

This Order shall apply to Centers for Health Development where Collaborating Centers shall be established, including technical manpower involved in the fields of malaria diagnosis and treatment and malaria prevention through vector control; and to all health offices which shall be catered to by the three collaborating centers. 



IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS: 

l. Malaria case — is a person in whom, regardless of the presence or absence of clinical symptoms, malaria parasites have been confirmed by quality laboratory diagnosis. 

2. Microscopy —- is the gold standard in malaria diagnosis. I 

3. Rapid Diagnostic Test — is an antigen-based stick, cassette or card test for malaria in which a colored line indicates that plasmodia antigens have been detected 

4. Vector controls — are measures directed against the vector of the disease and intended to limit its ability to transmit the disease. 

5. Bioassay test — is a process of checking the mortality of a target mosquito vector exposed to the sprayed surface or Insecticide-treated nets (ITN) / long lasting Insecticide-treated nets (LLIN) at intervals of weeks or months after spraying or use the nets. 

6. Susceptibility test — is a test to determine the proportion of the vector population that is physiologically resistant to a particular insecticide. 

7. Collaborating Centers —— are facilities established, usually within regional offices, with its own structures and systems designed to provide a package of technical assistance geared towards improving/strengthening and sustaining the quality of malaria care services. 

8. Global Fund Malaria Project — is a consolidated malaria project for 40 malaria endemic provinces being supported by the Global Fund. 

V. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

1. Collaborating Centers shall continue to assume the responsibility of insuring the availability of manpower resources for the implementation of training activities until after the Global Fund Project life since they shall have the custodial rights over the equipment, supplies and materials provided by the Global Fund. They shall implement a source recovery scheme to augment resources for the operation and maintenance of the facility. 

2. Collaborating centers shall be a joint venture between the Global Fund Malaria Project and the Department of Health, the local government units and all other stakeholders. 

3. Collaborating centers shall be established within the catchment areas of the Centers for Health Development, with its own structures and systems to provide a package of technical assistance geared towards strengthening and sustaining the quality of malaria care services. 

4. The collaborating centers shall be established in regions considering I) the strategic locations that all provinces could be catered to without depending on the DOH central office, 2) shall have manpower compliment to perform microscopy and RDT validation; manpower to handle entomological training needs as well as perform bio—assay and insecticide susceptibility tests, 3) and an accredited manpower to run a regular training activity. 

5. The collaborating center shall be established and operationalized for a period of four (4) years, an application for renewal shall be submitted to the EXECOM when the need arise. 

6. A Memorandum of Agreement shall be perfected between the Department of Health and the Collaborating Centers. 

7. The selected regional office shall have an adequate, appropriate structure which can provide a floor area for 1-2 training rooms, 2 laboratories and an office. 41% 

8. Malaria care services shall include malaria quality assurance to focus on malaria diagnostic and treatment capacities and on preventive activities speciﬁc ally vector control activities. 

9. Collaborating centers shall provide the venue and manpower for the conduct of malaria diagnosis and treatment trainings such as routine and special quality assurance activities and vector control activities like the conduct of bio-assay and susceptibility tests. 

10. The collaborating centers shall allow other programs to use the facility, however, give priority to malaria activities. 


VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES 

1. Collaborating centers when established shall provide a regular system for health human resource development on malaria diagnosis and treatment and vector control. 

2. It shall also provide a regular system of quality control in the implementation of malaria diagnostics and treatment services specifically in the performance of malaria microscopy and RDT implementation. 

3. Quality control in the implementation of vector control activities inclusive of but not restricted to indoor residual spraying activities and mosquito net distribution and utilization shall likewise be provided. 

4. The quality of drugs and medicines, insecticides and vector control commodities such as LLIN shall be tested for- efficacy and compliance to standards. 

5. Each collaborating center shall have facilities intended to Basic Skills training and Refresher Course on Malaria Microscopy. This shall mean that each collaborating center shall have a minimum of: 


1. One training classroom for 15—20 people 

2. One S—header training microscope 

3. One training computer laptop with LCD projector and screen  

4. One photocopier machine 

5. One risograph 

6. One slide bank storage facility 


Each collaborating center shall have facilities for validation of slides which would need: 

1. 2 units of microscopes 

2. Slide storage facilities 

3. One desktop computer with printer for data banking purposes 

4. Office materials such as tables and chairs 

Each collaborating center shall also have facilities for entomology laboratory with and insectary which need: 

1. An insectary with a minimum floor area of 3 x 3 m. with air conditioning unit and an anteroom/office 

2. Mosquito cages and breeding pans with aerators . 

3. stereoscopes 

4. A refrigerator 

5. Bioassay and susceptibility test kits 

6. The ﬁnal decision on the choice of sites and ﬁnal working arrangements shall be determined by the National Center for Disease Prevention and Control-Infectious Disease Office. 

7. The regional offices designated as collaborating centers shall insure the availability of manpower resources to facilitate the implementation of training and monitoring activities. 

8. All equipment’s, supplies and materials provided by the Global Fund Project shall remain assets of the Global Fund Project until complete tum-over shall be effected by the end of project-life. 

9. The regional office shall have custodial rights over the equipment’s, supplies and materials and shall oversee the maintenance in proper working conditions. 

VII. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

I. Infectious Disease Office— National Center for Disease Prevention and Control (IDO-NCDPC) 

1. Assist in the finalization of the collaborating project design. 

2. Facilitate consultation with the TWG sub-committee on diagnostics, entomology, quality assurance and the RITM. 

3. Allotment of funds for implementation of Collaborating Centers. 

4. Ensure technical and logistic assistance be delivered on time and at regular basis for the accomplishment of program targets. 

5. Ensure that standards set by their Malaria Manual of Procedures shall be adhered in line with the Medium Term Development Plan (MDTP) and the Global Fund Malaria project goals and objectives. 

2. Center for Health Development (CHD) with lCollaborating Center 

1. Oversee the operations of the collaborating center according to the approved annual plan of action and MDTP of malaria. 

2. Provide the venue and personnel for the conduct of routine and special quality assurance activities to include regular proficiency testing of microscopic, evaluation of RDTs, therapeutic efficacy studies and bioassays and susceptibility tests. 

3. Provide the venue and manpower for the conduct of trainings on malaria diagnostic and treatment and on vector control. 

4. The CHDs shall ensure the availability of manpower resources to facilitate implementation of training and monitoring activities. 

5. The CHD shall oversee the maintenance of the equipment, supplies and materials in proper working conditions.  

3. Global Fund Malaria Project- Movement Against Malaria 

1. Initiate all consultations with the CHDs, LGUs directly targeted by the project. 

2. Negotiate all agreements on the implementation of ﬁnal program of work with all partners concerned. 

3. Provide equipment, supplies and materials related to the establishment of the collaborating center. 

4. Local Government Units and other Stakeholders

1. May channel their counterpart mechanism into the operationalization of the collaborating centers consistent with their actual need. 

VIII. REPEALING CLAUSE: 

Provisions from other issuances which are not affected by this Administrative Order shall remain valid and in effect. 

IX. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect immediately. 

</body>
 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

