Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>10/20/2014</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2014 - 0037 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Templates and Guidelines on the Use of Templates of Graphic Health Warnings Pursuant To Republic Act No. 10643 (“An Act to Effectively Instill Health Consciousness Through Graphic Health Warnings on Tobacco </subject>
<body>



I. BACKGROUND/ RATIONALE 

Pursuant to Article II, Section 15 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution, the State shall protect and promote the right to health of the people and instill health consciousness among them. 

There is unequivocal scientiﬁc evidence establishing that death, disease, and disability result from tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke. In the Philippines, at least 240 Filipinos die everyday, or approximately 87,000 per year, from tobacco-related diseases. Tobacco products and emissions contain numerous toxic compounds and over seventy carcinogens, including carbon monoxide, arsenic, benzene, butane, formaldehyde, lead, toluene, and nicotine, among others. 

On 4 September 2005, following its ratiﬁcation through the concurrence of the Senate of the Philippines, the World Health Organization’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) entered into force in the country and since then, has formed part of the law of the land, in accordance with Section 21, Article VII of the 1987 Constitution. 

The State accepts that, as a State-Party to the WHO FCTC, a treaty that reafﬁrms the right of all people to the highest standards of health, the Philippines is obliged to inform every person of the health consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke; to enact effective measures to curb and reduce tobacco use, especially among the youth; and to protect public health policy from the commercial and vested interests of the tobacco industry. 

The State is cognizant of the Philippines’ duty under Article 11 of the FCTC, which is to adopt and implement by September 2008 effective health warnings on tobacco products that should describe the harmful effects of tobacco use. 


(3) In the case of a package and carton that do not have a particular side or surface that is predominantly displayed or visible under normal or customary conditions of sale or use or those that are not described under Paragraphs c(1) and 0(2) of this Section, ﬁfty percent (50%) of the three (3) dominant sides or the total surface thereof, whichever is bigger, which will ensure that the Graphic Health Warnings are visibly shown. 

f. “Side Panel” refers to the surface of the pack that is deemed the largest surface available beyond the principal display areas where graphic health warnings must appear. 

g. “Tobacco Product Package” means the packet and package of tobacco products and any outside packaging and labelling of tobacco products for sale and distribution in the domestic market, importation, trade, exchange, or for exhibition, such as, but not limited to, packs, tins, boxes, pouches, ﬂip-tops, slide and shell packages, cartons, packages containing one (1) product unit, or other containers of tobacco products containing the logo or trademark of the tobacco companies, primarily intended for consumers or for retail sale. 

h. “Tobacco Products” means products entirely or partly made of leaf tobacco as raw material, which are manufactured to be used for smoking, sucking, chewing or snufﬁng, or by any other means of consumption. 

V. TEMPLATES 

The twelve (12) templates of Graphic Health Warning speciﬁed under Annex “A” of this Order shall be used in cigarette packages and other tobacco product packages. 

These 12 templates shall be printed simultaneously and these shall be rotated periodically for each brand family and also for each variant, so that every twenty-four (24) months, the variations of the warnings shall appear in the market with approximately equal frequency and equal display of health warnings and messages on retail packages. 

VI. GUIDELINES 

The Graphic Health Warnings shall be printed in accordance with the technical standards of presentation in the templates and the guidelines set forth in this Order and its Annexes. 

1. Size 

The Graphic Health Warnings shall be printed on ﬁfty percent (50%) of the principal display surfaces of any tobacco product package, including package inserts and onserts; it shall occupy ﬁfty percent (50%) of the front and ﬁfty percent (50%) of the back panel of the packaging. The printing of the Graphic Health Warnings shall be done without the use of any border, frame or any other design that will effectively lessen the size of the warning.

 

2. Position 

The Graphic Health Warnings shall be located at the lower portions of the panels or principal display areas. 

3. Inserts, Onserts, and Any Outside Packaging and Labelling 

The Graphic Health Warnings shall be printed on fifty percent (50%) of the principal display surfaces of any tobacco product package, including package inserts, onserts, and any outside packaging and labeling. 

4. Wrappers or Sleeves 

No part of the warning shall be obliterated, obscured, folded, severed or become unreadable when a wrapper or sleeve on the package is removed. Nothing shall be printed or applied on a location where it is likely to obscure or cover in part or in whole the Graphic Health Warnings. ' 

5. Visibility 

The printing of the Graphic Health Warning shall be done without the use of any design that will effectively lessen the size of the warning or reduce its clarity and vividness. To preserve the appearance and integrity of the Graphic Health Warnings, tobacco product packaging and labelling shall not include any features designed to modify the warnings, including, but not limited to heat activated inks, inks or embellishments designed to appear gradually over time, or inks that appear ﬂuorescent in certain light. 

6. Color and Printing Quality 

6.1 The Graphic Health Warnings shall be printed in four colors /-cmyk-/ screen 133 lines per inch based on a source ﬁle of 300 dpi. 

6.2 The printing of the Graphic Health Warnings shall be done using current available technology for purposes of providing vivid and realistic pictures. The primary consideration in determining the printing quality should be the overall effect on the tobacco packaging, i.e., the Graphic Health Warnings should be as clear, vivid and vibrant as the rest of the tobacco packaging. Any ink used in the printing of the Graphic Health Warnings shall be of such a quality that will not fade, bleed, or modify the appearance of the warning over time. 

6.3 The Graphic Health Warnings shall be printed or inscribed on the package in a color which contrasts conspicuously with the background of the package or its labels, as provided by these guidelines and templates. 


6.4 The Graphic Health Warnings shall be reproduced in the same quality, color and proportion as provided by the Department in the templates or in the digital form, whichever is clearer and more vivid, without modiﬁcation. 

6.5 The composite images of the Graphic Health Warnings shall be contained in a digital storage device and/or an electronic repository that shall be maintained by the Department and which shall be available to public upon request. 

7. Language 

The text warning accompanying the photographic image shall be printed in Filipino on the front panel and English on the back panel. In the case of other containers where there is only one (1) external surface area, the accompanying text shall be printed alternately in English or Filipino. 

8. Mastercases 

All mastercases that contain the logo or trademark of tobacco brands shall contain the textual health warning "SMOKING KILLS," which shall be printed in the same single color and in bold print as the trademark logo. The textual health warnings shall be of equal prominence and visibility as the logo or trademark of tobacco companies. Such textual warnings on the mastercase shall occupy at least ﬁfty percent (50%) of each principal display panel of the mastercase. 

9. Side panel 

Tobacco product packages found in the market, shall bear, on one (1) side panel, additional health warnings, hotlines and/or websites for tobacco-related concerns, or tips on how to stop smoking, which shall be prominently displayed without the use of any border, frame or any other design that will effectively lessen the size of the textual warning, in accordance with the templates provided. Such information shall occupy thirty percent (3 0%) of the display surface of one side panel 

10. Misleading Descriptors 

One year after the issuance of templates, no cigarette packs or other tobacco product packages shall bear any number or descriptor such as low tar, light, ultra-light, or mild, extra, ultra, and similar terms in any language that claims or misleads a consumer to believe that a tobacco product or variant is healthier, safer, or less harmful. The Department shall not approve any proposal, proof or other submission of Graphic Health Warnings that is afﬁxed to a tobacco product package that bears any such number or descriptor. 

VII. NEW TEMPLATES 

The Department of Health shall issue new templates every two (2) years from issuance of this Order to be used by all manufacturers, importers and distributors of tobacco products that are introduced in the Philippine market. Unless new templates are released by the Department of Health, the templates speciﬁed under Annex “A” hereof shall continue to be used by all covered manufacturers, importers and distributors. 

The guidelines speciﬁed in this Order shall also govern any new templates to be issued by the Department of Health. VIII. REPEALING CLAUSE 

All Administrative Orders, Circulars, Memoranda or parts thereof inconsistent with this Administrative Order are hereby repealed or modiﬁed accordingly. IX. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

In case any provision of this Administrative Order is declared contrary to law or unconstitutional, other provisions that are not affected thereby shall remain in force and effect. 

X. EFFECTIVITY 

This Administrative Order shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and shall take effect immediately. 

</body>
 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>






