Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>06/09/2014</date>
<docnum>No. 2014 - 0020 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT : Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10614, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Region 1 Medical Center in Dagupan City. Pangasinan from Three Hundred (300) To Six Hundred (600)., Authorizing the Increase of its Medical Personnel, Upgrading its Services, Facilities and Professional Health Care and Appropriating Funds Therefor”. </subject>
<body>


I. Rationale/Background 

Pangasinan General Hospital located at Dagupan City, Pangasinan was built in 1925 as a 50 bed capacity hospital. The hospital was renamed by virtue of Bates Pambansa Bilang 123 entitled, “An Act Changing the Name of the Pangasinan General Hospital in the City of Dagupan to Gov. Teoﬁlo Sison Memorial Hospita ” on March 10, 1981. 

In July 19.90, the hospital was rendered inoperable due to an intensity 7 earthquake that hit major parts of Luzon. The hospital underwent massive rehabilitation. On February 20, 1995, Republic Act 7893, “An Act Converting the Governor Teofilo Sison Memorial Hospital in Dagupan City into a Three Hundred (300)-Bed Capacity Medical Center to be Known as the Region I Medical Center, and Appropriaring Funds Therfor” the hospital was upgraded to a 300 bed capacity medical center with the new name of Region 1 Medical Center (RIMC) and transferred the supervision and administrative control from the Provincial Government of Pangasinan to the Department of Health. 

The RIMC is now one of the premier hospitals north of Manila. It is the referral of other health institutions in the Northern and Central Luzon. The catchment area of the hospital is the entire province of Pangasinan and other provinces in Region 1. The RlMC in Pangasinan, borders La Union and Benguet to the north, Nueva Vizcaya and Nueva Ecija to the east, and Zambales and Tarlac to the south. 

Given the catchment area and its steady growth of population, the authorized bed capacity of 300 but with an actual implementing of 450 beds, is no longer commensurate to the needs of the present population as evidenced in the increase of hospital’s bed occupancy rate from 98% in 2009 to 112% in 2011. Referrals from other hospitals rose from a measly 406 in 2008 to a very large 2,089 in 2012. 

With Department Order 2011-0188 “Kalusugang Pangkahalatan Execution Plan and Implementation Arrangements”, the RIMC is mandated to provide universal health care through its hospital services by increasing the number of its health human resources, improving its infrastructures, and upgrading its capabilities in terms of expertise, instruments and equipment. 



Furthermore, the upgrading or improvement of the facilities will provide accessibility, affordability and quality health care services to the people as guaranteed under the Philippine Constitution. Hence, in CY2013, the RlMC was given priority modernization under the Public Private Partnership for Health. 

Thus, pursuant to R. A. 10614, these Implementing Rules and Regulations are hereby established. 

11. Objective 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations for the Implementation of Republic Act No. 10614, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Region 1 Medical Center in Dagupan City, Pangasinan from Three Hundred (300) To Six Hundred (600), Authorizing the Increase of its Medical Personnel, Upgrading its Services, Facilities and Professional Health Care and Appropriating Funds Therefor”. 

III. Deﬁnition of Terms/Acronyms 

1. Bed Capacity —— pertains to the number of hospital beds to accommodate inpatients 

2. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) — refers to the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period; the ideal or recommended BOR is from 65% to 85% 

3. DOH —— refers to Department of Health 

4. DBM — refers to Department of Budget Management 

5. Level 3 .... as deﬁned in DOH Administrative Order No. 2012-0012 “Rules and Regulation Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines” 


6. R1MC — refers to Region 1 Medical Center 

IV. Policies and Guidelines 

A. General Policies 

In pursuing the implementation of RA No. 10614, the R1MC will continue to provide accessible, affordable and quality health care services to the people without regard to race, gender, national or ethnic origin, religion, social and economic status. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of Republic Act No. 10614 the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

The RlMC shall operate as a 600—bed capacity Level 3 tertiary, teaching and training medical center specializing in cancer treatment, open heart surgery and transplant, and enhancement of kidney transplant and other specialized services. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The RIMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure, rights of its human resource, reclassify and/or upgrade their positions, promote professional development and hire the necessary professional and skilled health human resource complement to conform with the approved DOH-DBM Joint Circular No. 2013—1, “Organization, Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern for Government Hospitals CY 2013 Edition” dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Equipment 

The RIMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH standards of a Level 3 medical- center with specialized services for cancer treatment, open heart surgery and transplant, and enhancement of kidney transplant and other specialties. 

4. Infrastructure 

The RIMC shall implement construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure conforming to all existing laws and DOH standards. 

5. Systems Development 

The RIMC shall continue to sustain high standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety of all patients, personnel and clientele of the hospital. It shall sustain the implementation of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

6. Quality Management 

The RlMC shall enhance and implement Patient Safety Program, continuing quality improvement of services, and other public health programs in the hospital for efﬁcient and patient—centered general health care facility. 

The RlMC shall sustain the ISO 9001:2008 standards for the continual improvement of quality management system. 

V. Implementing Structure 

1. Administrative Control The highest DOH official designated for Region 1 shall have oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations of RlMC as conferred by applicable laws and regulations. The RlMC Medical Center Chief shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality management hospital operations and shall submit developmental plans, physical/ﬁnancial reports and hospital statistical reports to the DOH-Central Ofﬁce. 

2. Source of Funds 

a) Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA) and/or public-private partnership and other sources. 

b) The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the hospital income, Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) reimbursements, public-private partnership and other sources. 

c) Personal Services to carry out the full implementation of RA 10614 shall be sourced from GAA and other sources. 

d) Release of funds is subject to the hospital development plan approved by the designated appropriate authority. 

VI. Repealing / Separability Clause 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days following publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette and at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation. 
</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

