Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>02/14/2014</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype> 
<docnum>No. 2014 - 0006 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines on the Establishment of Regional Laboratory Network As Part of the National Framework of the National Health Laboratory Network </subject>
<body>


I  RATIONALE 

Pursuant to the achievement of quality, service and accessible health facilities which is if one of the strategies of Universal Health Care ( Kalusugan Pangkalahatan ), the Department of Health promulgated Administrative Order No. 2012— 0021 entitled “ National Framework of the National Health Laboratory Network (NH‘LN)” and the “ Strategic Plan for the National Health Laboratory Network in the Philippines for 2011 —2016.” The Vision of the Strategic Plan is the development of a National Health Laboratory Network (NHLN) that provides quality, reliable, affordable and accessible laboratory services and informatiOn for the appropriate management of patients and prevention / control of diseases. The laboratory network serves as a support _ mechanism for building the capacity of the laboratories to implement the strategies of the Strategic Plan for the NHLN. The goals of the Strategic Plan are 1. The development and Operation of an efficient, effective sustainable National Health Laboratory Network (NHLN); 2. The establishment of laboratory services that meet local and international quality standards; 3. ' Laboratory services that provide safe working conditions for laboratory staff, patients and the community; 4. National policies, budget and financial support that ensure fiscal sustainability. 

The implementation of the nine (9) strategies of the Strategic Plan for the’NHLN will be done at 3 levels, i.e at the National level as provided in UPC No. 2013—5724; at the Regional level through a Regional Laboratory Network; and at the Laboratory level through the training. and implementation of a “Laboratory Action Plan” of Clinical laboratories in every Regional ' Laboratory Network. This issuance provides the Guidelines in establishing and maintaining the Regional Laboratory Network, stating the objectives, Structure and operation of such a Network. 

The Regional Laboratory Network shall serve' to strengthen the capabilities of each laboratory Within the network in implementing the strategies of the Strategic Plan. Networking shall include training activities, consultation meetings at all levels where issues, problems and needs are discussed, best practices shared, dissemination of administrative issuances and other directives, reagents and other resources and data exchanged. The aim of networking is to ensure that all health laboratories work harmoniously in an effective, practical‘and functional way. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Order is issued to promulgate guidelines in the establishment and operation of a Regional LaboratoryNetwork pursuant” to Administrative Order No.” 2012— 0021. 


III. SCOPE COVERAGE 

These Guidelines shall apply to clinical laboratories of national and local government hospitals and rural health facilities and Of private hospital—based and free-standing clinical laboratories in urban and rural areas Of the country and shall be implemented by responsible DOH Undersecretaries,Assistant, Secretaries, Directors of Bureaus, Centers forHealth Development, Services and Specialty Hospitals, Directors / Chiefs Of Medical Centers and Hospitals, Provincial, City and Municipal Health Officers and all others concerned. 

Iv. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

For purposes Of this Order, the following terms and acronyms shall have the following definition : 

1. Clinical Laboratory — refers to a facility where tests are done on specimens from the human body to Obtain information about the health status of a patient for the diagnosis, prevention and treatment of diseases 

2. Laboratory Network w refers to a group of laboratories who join together with a common vision, assist each other and share services, material and human resources and information. 

3. Technical expert —— refers to a person with a high degree of knowledge and skill in a particular technical field or subject 

4. Quality service — refers to service based on standards to meet customer needs and requirements 

5. “Laboratory Action Plan" — refers to a plan of activities designed for the laboratory to implement the strategies of the Strategic Plan for the NHLN 

6. Free standing clinical laboratory  refers tO a laboratory that does not form part Of any other institution 

7. Modified Gantt Chart  refers to a mOnitoring tool that shows both the planned and completed work over a period of time 

8. Levels of Laboratories — refers to the hierarchy of laboratories based on the administrative levels of government and required functions and service capabilities 

9. CHD acronym for the Center for Health Development 

10. NUHL—acronym for the National Unit for Health Laboratories 

11. NHLN acronym for the National Health Laboratory Network 


V. IMPLEMENTING MECHANISM 

A. GENERAL-GUIDELINES 

1. The implementation Of the nine (9) strategies of the Strategic Plan for the National Health Laboratory Network shall be done at three (3) levels: 

a. At the National Level as provided in DPO NO. 2012- 5724 with the following organizational structure: 

i. National Unit for Health Laboratories (NUHL) under the National Center for Health Facility Development, DOH 

ii. National Advisory Council for NHLN 


iii. National Technical Working Group (TWG) for Implementation of the Strategic Plan for NHLN 

b. At the Regional level In which a Regional Team leads the implementation through a Regional LaboratOry Network 

c. At the Laboratory Network In which each laboratory is trained to formulate and carry out a Laboratory Action Plan enabling the laboratory to implement the nine (9) strategies of the Strategic Plan for NHLN 

2. At the National level, the Strategic Plan for the National Health LaboratoryNetwork (NHLN) shall provide the general policies and strategies for elevating the quality of the health laboratory services and networking among health laboratories at different levels In each region. 

a. The National Technical Working Group (TWGlf or the Strategic Plan for NHLN I  shall assist the NUHL In the implementation Of the Strategic Plan-and provide standards, guidelines- training and resource persons to the Regional Laboratory networks. 

b. The NUHL and TWG for the Strategic Plan Shall assist the Regional Laboratory Network in the implementation Of their Regional Laboratory Network Action Plans. 

3. in every region, a Regional Laboratory Network shall be organized led by a Regional Laboratory Network Council which shall develop and implement Regional ' Laboratory Network Action Plans:

a. The Regional Laboratory Network Council shall subscribe 'to the NHLN ’ concepts and policies. which mandate that quality laboratory services ”deliver timely, reliable and affordable laboratory information for the management of patients and for policies, planning and Operational decisions of public health programs. 

b. The Regional Laboratory Network Council shall establish linkage with the CHD . for the planning, implementation and funding of their activities. 

c. The Regional Laboratory Network Council shall train the Staff Of the Clinical laboratories in the Laboratory Action Plan to implement the strategies of the Strategic Plan for NHLN. 

d. Reports of accomplishment of the Regional Laboratory Network Council shall be submitted periodically to the CHD and NUHL, NCHFD 

4. At the Laboratory level, the Staff of clinical laboratories who are members of the Regional Laboratory Network shall be trained on Laboratory Action Plan to ensure  the provision of quality service and performance. 

B. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES

1. Organizing the Regional Laboratory Network: 

a. Members of the Regional Laboratory Network shall be drawn from representatives of clinical laboratories of national and local government hospitals and rural health, facilities and Of private hospital—based and free standing clinical laboratories. Membership shall be on a voluntary basis. 

b. A Regional LabOratOry Network Council, the governing body of the Network, Shall be elected by the members of the Network. 

c. The Council shall elect the Officers consisting Of but not limited to a Chairman, Vice-chairman, Secretary and Treasurer. 

d. A Management Team consisting of full time or part time Pathologists and Senior Medical Technologists shall be employed and trained to coordinate the planning and implementation of activities. 

e. Pathologists, Senior Medical Technologists and other Technical Experts shall be recruited and organized into Committees to serve as Resource Persons in ' formulating Standards, Policies and Procedures and Training Programs. 

f. Technical Experts/ Resource Persons shall be organized into Committees. The roles and functions of each committee shall be identified. 

g. An Organizational-Chart Shall be formulated to define the authority, relationships and accountability Of various components of Regional Laboratory Network. 

2. Planning the Activities Of the Regional Laboratory Network: 

a. The Regional Laboratory Network Council Shall adopt Policies and Procedures for the planning, implementation, coordination and monitoring of programs, projects and activities of the Regional Laboratory Network. 

b. The Council shall prepare a Regional Laboratory Network Action Plan with the following components: 

i. Vision, Mission Objectives. 
ii. Priority Goals / Strategies which may include, but not limited to: 

Advocacy for the Strategic Plan for NHLN 

Training in Laboratory Action Plan Capacity Building for Minimum Service Capabilities 

Referral of laboratory examinations and reporting Of results 

Rational use of laboratory services 

Financing of laboratory services 

c. The Council shall secure a Regional Circular from CHD for the establishment and operation of the Regional Laboratory Network 

3. Operation and Management Of the Regional Laboratory Network. 

a. Implement the activities Of the Regional Laboratory Network Action Plan to attain the priority goals. 

b. Monitor the activities through a Monitoring Plan and the Monitoring Tools (Modified Gantt Chart ) 

c. Analyze and evaluate the. periodic reports of activities and accomplishments and take action-when the activities are delayed or are not done. 

d. Report accomplishments and recommendations to CHD and National Unit for Health Laboratories, NCHFD. 

e. Formulate the Regional Action Plan for the follOwing year. New/ additional priority goals may be included. 

f. Develop linkages and coordinate with other Regional Laboratory Networks  

C. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE REGIONAL LABORATORY NETWORK 

Regional Laboratory Network Members 1. Shall attend meetings called by the Regional Laboratory Network Council. 

2. Shall support and participate in the activities of the Council. 

3. Shall share experience and expertise for the advancement of laboratory technology. 

4. Shall develop and implement laboratory action plan for the improvement of the laboratory in adherence to quality management system 

5 Shall be wiIIing to render technical assistance/ advice to the other members of the  Network. 

6. Shall abide by the policies and guidelines formulated by the Network Council 

Regional Laboratory Network Council 

1. As the goVerning body of the Network shall formulate an organizational chart, standards policies and guidelines for its operation and implementation Of activities.

2. Shall develop a Regional Laboratory Network Action Plan, implement, monitor and evaluate its activities. 

3.  Shall build partnership with the Center fOr Health Development (CHD) for the  planning, conduct and funding of certain activities as indicated in the approved Work and Financial Plan of the CHD.

4. Shall conduct regular Council meetings to discuss reports of activities and accomplishments and to plan for needed / required activities. 

5. Shall manage training programs as resource persons/ facilitators and/or organizers in collaboration with technical experts. 

6, Shall prepare project proposals to potential donors to fund the activities in the Regional Network Action Plan. 

7. Shall hire the Management Team, orient them on their roles and responsibilities and supervise their work. 

8. The Council Chairman, as member of the National Technical Working Group (TWG) for the implementation of the Strategic Plan for the NHLN, shall submit periodic reports to the Overall Chair of the National TWG- and/or attend meetings as necessary.  


Regional Laboratory Network Management Team 

1. The Management Team, compOsed of a Pathologist and a Senior Medical Technologist shall maintain an updated directory of the Regional Laboratory Network members and Council Officers/ members 

2. Shall regularly report to the Council President and “Secretary for assignments/ I update on activities. 

3. Shall coordinate the planning of activities prepare and fellow up communications- "and conduct visits, if necessary. 

4. Shall make arrangement for the implementation of activities, meetings or training

5. Shall perform secretarial/ clerical work. 

6. Shall maintain file/record of network activities 

7. Shall submit periodic reports to the Council President and to CHD Director through the CHD Secretariat. 

D. FUNDING 

The potential sources of financial support of the Regional Laboratory Network are :

1. Center for Health Development 

2. Provincial,_City and Municipal Governments 

3. Health Facility Enhancement Program 

4. Funding from Member Hospitals (Training Fees, Membership Fees, etc.) 

5. Government Financial Institutions, BOI, PEZA, PCSO, PAGCOR 

6. Local andINational Donor Organizations 

7. International Development Agencies (USAID, IICA, AUSAID, CIDA, WHO)


The Regional Laboratory Network, through its Council, shall conduct orientation seminar and advocacy campaign on-the Strategic Plan for the National Health Laboratory Network to the key officials of the above mentioned potential funding sources. A proposal for each funding agency/ institution shall be prepared and presented highlighting the benefits and advantages of establishing and institutionalizing a Regional Laboratory Network to the entire health IaboratOry system in their region. The planned activities of the Network and the specific activities for-possible funding support will be stated including the cost estimate. 

VI. REPEALING CLAUSE 

All Orders whose provisions are inconsistent or contrary to this Order are hereby rescinded and modified accordingly. 

VII. EFECTIVITY This Order shall take effect immediately. 

</body>

 <sign>ENRIQUE T. ONA, MD</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

