Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>05/08/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0018 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8338, “An Act Upgrading the Southern Isabela District Hospital in Santiago City, Province of Isabela, into a Tertiary General Hospital, to be known as the Southern Isabela General Hospital and Appropriating Funds Therefor” </subject>
<body>

I. Rationale / Background 

Southern Isabela General Hospital started as the Santiago Emergency Hospital that was established through Municipal Resolution No. 191 on August 15, 1961. Santiago Emergency Hospital was transferred to the national government through Republic Act No. 3138 of 1974. 

By virtue of Department Memorandum Circular No. 10 in 1986, it became the Southern Isabela District Hospital until 1993, when it was devolved to the province of Isabela. On August 8, 1997, the Hospital was renationalized through RA No. 8338, “An Act Upgrading the Southern Isabela District Hospital in Santiago City, Province of Isabela, into a Tertiary General Hospital, to be known as the Southern Isabela General Hospital and Appropriating Funds Therefor”. 

With the steady inﬂux of patients through the years, the Southern Isabela General Hospital (SIGH) responded by gradually increasing its implementing capacity to SO-bed then to lSO-bed capacity Level 1 hospital. In the latter part of 2014, SIGH was licensed as a Level 2 category ZOO-bed capacity hospital but still with a high bed occupancy rate (BOR) of 93%. 

On December 22, 2014 SIGH was awarded with ISO 9001:2008 Certiﬁcation, despite the incomplete implementation of RA No. 8338. 

II. Objectives 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations for the implementation of RA No. 8338. “An Act Upgrading the Southern Isabela District Hospital in Santiago City, Province of Isabela, into a Tertiary General Hospital, to be known as the Southern Isabela General Hospital and Appropriating Funds Therefore”. 

III. Scope 

These Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall only pertain to Republic Act No. 8338. ' 


IV. Definition of Terms/Acronym 

1. Bed Occupancy Rate - The percentage of inpatient beds occupied over a period of time. It is a measure of the intensity of hospital resources utilized by in-patients. 

2. DBM — refers to Department of Budget and Management 

3. DOH AO No. 2012-0012- Refers to the Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospital and other Facilities in the Philippines dated July 18, 2012. 

4. RA. 8338 — otherwise known as “Republic Act No. 8338” is an An Act upgrading the Southern Isabela District Hospital in Santiago City, Province of Isabela, into a tertiary general hospital, to be known as the Southern Isabela General Hospital and appropriating funds therefor.” 

5. SIGH — refers to Southern Isabela General Hospital 

V. Policies and Guidelines 

A. General Policies 

The Southern Isabela General Hospital shall provide a Tertiary level of promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative health care services and research. It shall be fully equipped with the state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 2 hospital. 

Furthermore, the SIGH shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the continual improvement of its service capability and capacity while serving as a referral hospital, complementing the services of local government health care facilities in the province and the region. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the Development Plan of SIGH. 

B. Implementing Guidelines 

In support of the upgrading of the hospital, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services The SIGH shall operate as a 200 bed capacity, Level 2 Tertiary general hospital and be continuously upgraded to be a fully operational 200-bed Level 2 general hospital. Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established. 

The incremental increase in bed capacity and commensurate services provided by the Act shall be achieved by the end of year 2016. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The SIGH shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resources, re—classify and/or upgrade positions, promote professional development and shall hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards and intent of RA No. 8338. 

The SIGH shall increase its health personnel based on recommended stafﬁng pattern for a 200—bed capacity hospital following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All records of assets, movable and immovable of SIGH as well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and shall be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The SIGH shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform with DOH minimum standards of a Level 2 general hospital as provided for under DOH AO No. 2012-0012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of the DOH. 

5. Infrastructure 

The SIGH shall implement and seek the support of DOH for the construction, repair or renovation of physical infrastructure to conform with all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The SIGH shall develop and sustain its standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming with the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The SIGH shall implement the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards. The SIGH shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program, Patient Safety, policies and standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health 

Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. Implementing Structure 

1. Administrative Control 

The highest ranking designated DOH ofﬁcial or Head of the Ofﬁce for Health Operations shall have an oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations. The DOH Regional Ofﬁce No. II shall monitor the implementation of Republic Act No. 8338 guided by this Administrative Order. 

The Chief of Hospital of SIGH shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce through the DOH Regional Ofﬁce No. II. 

2. Source of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 8338 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes PhilHealth payments, public— private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2. The additional maintenance and other operating expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and/or other modes of ﬁnancing scheme. 

3. Personnel Services (PS) to carry out the full implementation of the stafﬁng pattern of 200 beds shall be implemented in compliance with DOH-DBM Joint Circular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

4. Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority. 

VII. Repealing/Separability Clause 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the ofﬁcial gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>
<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>
