Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>05/06/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0019 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 8527, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center Extension Hospital in the Municipality of Talavera, Province of Nueva Eciia, from Ten (10) Beds to Fifty (50) Beds Capacity, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” </subject>
<body>
 




I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center Talavera Extension Hospital (DPJGMRMC-TEH) was created by virtue of Batas Pambansa 396 dated May 18, 1983, entitled “An Act Establishing an Extension Hospital in the Municipality of Talavera, Province of Nueva Ecija.” The said hospital which started to operate in 1985 with a capacity of 10 Beds with 17 personnel was licensed to operate as a Primary Level Hospital by the Department of Health. 

On February 14, 1998, the hospital's bed capacity was increased from 10 to 50 by virtue of RA No. 8527. This Act is signiﬁcant in order to provide quality, efficient, and effective direct health care services to the people of Talavera, Nueva Ecija and its neighboring municipalities. 

In the year 2003, a new hospital building was completed and started to serve as the Emergency Room complex with additional patients wards. With the rising need for health care services, the hospital has to develop and expand to deliver _quality health services 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations for the implementation of RA No. 8527, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center Extension Hospital in the Municipality of Talavera, Province of Nueva Ecija, from Ten (10) Beds to Fifty (50) Beds Capacity, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

III. SCOPE 

The Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall pertain only to the provisions ofRA No. 8527. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. Act - refers to Republic Act 8527, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center Extension Hospital in the Municipality of Talavera, Province of Nueva Ecij a, from Ten (10) Beds to Fifty (50) Beds Capacity, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

2. AO No. 2012—0012 — refers to “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines”, dated July 18,2012 

3. DPJGMRMC-TEH ~ Dr. Paulino J. Garcia Memorial Research and Medical Center — Talavera Extension Hospital 

4. Level I Hospital — refers to the DOH Classiﬁcation of DPJGMRMC-TEH as deﬁned by A0 2012-0012 

POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policy 

The DPJGMRMC—TEH shall provide promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative health care services. It shall be fully equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed 50-bed capacity and accredited Level I hospital. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms In support of RA No. 8527, the following guidelines shall be implemented. 

1. Expansion of Services 

The DPJGMRMC-TEH shall operate as a 50-bed capacity, Level 1 Hospital by 2016 and be continuously upgraded to Level 2 Hospital by year 2020. 

2. Health Human Resources 

The DPJGMRMC-TEH shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resources. It shall also make an evaluation of the existing health human resource complement and upgrade the positions and hire additional staff to comply and conform with DOH standards as per DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals”, CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All records of assets, movable and immovable of DPJGMRMC-TEH as well as its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The DPJGMRMC-TEH shall make an inventory of its existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH minimum standards of a Level 1 Hospital as provided for under DOH-A0 No. 2012- 0012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be implemented. 

5. Infrastructure 

The DPJGMRMC-TEH shall implement construction, repair and renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The DPJGMRMC—TEH shall develop and sustain then standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, heath workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The DPJGMRMC-TEH shall implement the quality management system in conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards. The hospital shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program, Patient Safety, policies and standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control 

The highest ranking designated DOH ofﬁcial or Head of the Ofﬁce for Health Operations shall have an oversight jurisdiction over hospital operations of the main hospital of the DPJGMRMC—TEH. 

The Medical Center Chief II of DPJGMRMC shall be responsible for monitoring the implementation of RA No. 8527, guided by this administrative order.

The Chief of Hospital II of the DPJGMRMC-TEH together with the Medical Center Chief II of DPJGMRMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce through the DOH Regional Ofﬁce No. III.

B. Source of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 8527 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital revenues, Philhealth reimbursements, public—private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rule and regulations. 

2. The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital revenue, Philhealth reimbursements, public-private partnership and other sources. 

3. Personnel Services (PS) to carry out the full implementation of the approved hospital stafﬁng pattern of a 50-bed capacity hospital shall be sourced ﬁom the GAA as provided in DOH-DBM Joint Circular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013. 

4. Release of funds shall be approved by the designated appropriate authority. 

VII. REPEALING/SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the Ofﬁcial Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>
<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>

