Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>10/02/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 042 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Guidelines for the Establishment of the Department of Health (DOH) Academy </subject>
<body>


I. RATIONALE 

The DOH reCognizes the vital role of Human Resources for Health (HRH) in the attainment of health system goals of better health outcomes and responsive health system by Administrative Order 2010-0036 “The Aquino Health Agenda: Achieving Universal Health Care for All Filipinos” includes HRH as one of the six strategic instruments to achieve the three strategic thrusts of the Aquino Health Agenda, namely: 1) ﬁnancial risk protection through expansion in National Health Insurance Program enrollment and beneﬁt delivery; 2) improved access to quality hospitals and health care facilities; and 3) attainment of health-related Millennium Development Goals. 

Executive Order No 102 s. 1999 issued on May 24, 1999, redirects the functions and operations of the DOH. Under this Order, the DOH shall serve as the lead agency in assuring equitable, accessible and quality health services by enforcing policies, standards and regulations; building capacities of HRH to deliver health services and implement public health programs through technical assistance, training, logistical support, grants and scholarships; and promoting standards of excellence in the training and education of HRH at all levels of the health care system (and adopted in EO 366). 

To fully realize the above mandates of DOH HHRDB in line with the goals and strategies of the DOH to achieve Universal Health Care, this Order establishes the Department of Health Academy. It shall be the primary training arm of the DOH that exercises stewardship in providing Learning and Development Interventions (LDIs) that are relevant, rationalized and responsive to the dynamic needs of the health sector in line with the highest ethical and professional standards for HRH in Local Government Unit (LGUs) including public and private service providersin Service Delivery Networks (SDNs), and other ofﬁces and organizations within the health sector. 


 

II. OBJECTIVES 

A. General 

To prescribe policies and guidelines for the establishment of the DOH Academy. 

B. Speciﬁc 

1. To deﬁne the organizational structure and functions of the DOH Academy. 

2. To prescribe policies and operational guidelines for the development, implementation, management, monitoring and evaluation of LDIs in LGUs and health-related sectors. 

III. SCOPE 

The Order applies to HRH working in National and Local health facilities including the Department of Health, its attached agencies, private service providers in Service Delivery Networks (SDNs), and other ofﬁces and organizations within the health sector. 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

1. Accreditation — formal or ofﬁcial approval granted to a person, a program or an organization upon meeting essential requirements of achievement standards including qualiﬁcations or unit(s) of a qualiﬁcation, usually for a particular period of time as deﬁned by an accrediting agency (Senate Bill no. 2581) 

2. Assessment — the process of collecting evidence and making judgements on the nature and extent of progress towards performance requirements set out in a standard, and determining levels of development a candidate has achieved based on prior assessment. It is based on the actual knowledge, behavior and skills an individual can demonstrate in the workplace (Department Order No. 2013—0100) 

3. Certification -— the process of validating the qualiﬁcations and competencies against standards. A “Certiﬁcate of Competence” is issued to a person who is found to be competent in all areas of a given level (DO 2013 -0100) 

4. Competencies — clusters of related knowledge, skills and attitude that enable a person to perform the functions of the job. They correlate with performance, which can be measured against standards and can be improved by education and training 

5. Competency-Based Human Resources for Health Management and Development System (HRHMDS) — refers to the ﬁve (5) sub-systems namely: 1) Human Resource Flaming System, 2) Job Related Recruitment and Selection System, 3) Performance Management System, 4) Learning and Development Needs Analysis and 5) Career Development and Management System that use competencies as basis for planning, recruitment, retention and continuing professional development of human resources for health 

6. Continuing Professional Development (CPD) Credit Units — refers to the value of an amount of learning gained from formal or non-formal education and that can be accumulated to predetermined levels for award of a qualiﬁcation 

7. Credit — refers to the value given to a particular course or subject, based on competencies and learning outcomes (adopted from RA 10647) 

8. DOH Academy — the primary training arm of the DOH in building the competencies of HRH working in National and Local health facilities including the Department of Health, its attached agencies, private service providers in Service Delivery Networks (SDNs), and other ofﬁces and organizations within the health sector. 

9. Health Worker— all persons who are engaged in health and health-related work, and all persons employed in all hospitals, sanitaria, health inﬁrmaries, health centers, rural health units, barangay health stations, clinics and other health-related establishments, public or private, and shall include medical, allied health professionals, administrative and support personnel employed regardless of their employment status (adopted from RA 7305) 

10. Learning and Development Interventions (LDIs)— the process of imparting skills, knowledge and attitude or competencies in order to improve performance and meet an agreed standard of proﬁciency (DO 2013 «- 0100) 

11. Learning and Development Needs Analysis (LDNA)—-refers to tools and activities designed to identify gaps in competencies necessary to fulﬁll job functions and LDls 'to ﬁll such gaps. It is part of the Competency-Based HRHMDS. 

12. Open Distance Learning -~. refers to the merger of two concepts, that of open learning and distance education. It is a system which combines the methodology of distance education with the concepts of open learning and ﬂexible education (adopted from RA 10650) 

13. Philippine Qualifications Framework (PQF) — is a national policy which describes the levels of educational qualiﬁcations and sets the standards for qualiﬁcations outcomes. It is a quality assured national system for the development, recognition and award of qualiﬁcations based Ion standards of knowledge, skills and values acquired in different ways and methods by learners and workers of a certain country (adopted from RA 10647) 

14. Qualiﬁcation — a status gained after a person has been assessed to have achieved pre- deﬁned learning outcomes or competencies in accordance with a standard speciﬁed for a qualiﬁcation title, and is proven by a document issued by a recognized agency or body 

15. Quality Assurance (QA) — refers to planned and systematic processes or activities done before LDIs are designed or delivered 

16. Recognition of prior learning — refers to the acknowledgement of a person’s skills, knowledge, attitude or competencies gained from previous training, work and/or life experiences which may be used to grant status or credit 

17. Service Delivery Network(SDN)- refers to the network of health facilities and providers within the province or city-wide health system, offering a core package of health care services in an integrated and coordinated manner similar to the local health referral system (DO 2013 — 0100). It includes the following: 

a. Barangay Health Stations 

b. Rural Health Units 

c. Municipal Health Ofﬁces 

d. Level 1 hospitals 

e. Level 2 hospitals 

f. Level 3 hospitals 

g. Other Health Facilities 

IV. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

A. The DOH Academy shall be the primary training arm of the DOH in building the competencies of HRH in Service Delivery Networks and local health systems. 

B. The DOH Academy shall use a competency-based approach in the development, management and evaluation of Learning and Development Interventions (LDIs).  

C. The DOH Academy shall support the successful and efﬁcient implementation of health reform strategies by HRH under the Universal Health Care agenda by rationalizing and streamlining LDIs in LGU health facilities including private service providers in SDNs, and other health-related sectors.

D. The DOH Academy shall coordinate with the Learning and Development Division (LDD) for delivery of needed LDIs to DOH personnel. 

VI. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES 

A. The Department of Health Academy 

1. Mandate: 

Pursuant to Executive Order No. 102 s. 1999 “Redirecting the Functions and Operations of the Department of Health”, the DOH Academy is mandated to: 

a. Develop and maintain quality standards in the training and education of health care providers. 

b. Provide oversight functions and technical assistance on the delivery of learning and development interventions to Human Resources for Health. 

c. Monitor and evaluate the implementation of HRH training and development services of the DOH 
 

2. Objectives: 

a. To institutionalize an integrated delivery of health-related learning programs 

b. To develop competency-based learning interventions towards a responsive scale-up of HRH capabilities 

c. To establish a network of learning providers to accommodate all Service Delivery Networks in the country 

B. Organizational Structure of the DOH Academy 

1. The DOH Academy shall be a structure under the supervision of the Director IV of the Health Human Resource Development Bureau (HHRDB). Its functions shall be in line with the work of the Divisions of the HHRDB on the-Competency- Based HRHMDS to support learning and development needs of HRH in the health ' sector. 

2. The DOH Academy shall be composed of the following Sections namely: a) Policy, Accreditation and Partnerships; b) Flaming and Assessment; c) Research and Development; and, (:1) Implementation of LDIs. 

3. Each Section shall be assigned a Head and a team to carry out the functions of their respective Sections. The numbers and positions of staffs in each section shall be based on the assigned workload and determined by the Director IV of the HHRDB. 

C. Qualifications of Section Heads 

The following are qualiﬁcation of Section Heads: 

1. Recognized senior experts in a ﬁeld relevant to the functions of their respective Committee. 

2. Permanent DOH personnel holding positions of salary grade 22 or higher.

3. With at least 3 years of experience in any of the following: (human resource development, organizational development, organizational management or competency-based human resource management. 

4. Holder of a master’s degree in education, public health 0r management-related course. 


D. Sections under the DOH Academy 

1. Section for Policy, Accreditation and Partnerships 

a. Set QA policies for selecting and certifying learning and development providers as DOH Academy providers including, but not limited to: academic/Higher Educational Institutions, professional organizations, government agencies, non-government organizations and development partners for particular courses or modules including mode of delivery they are allowed to use. 


b. In partnership with the Professional Regulatory Commission (PRC), Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA)and the Commission on Higher Education (CHED), establish policies and mechanisms for assigning CPD units and Credit Units for each learning and development package; transferring Credits and assign equivalent academic credit units, and recognize prior learning leading to the next higher level in the PQF. 

c. Set standards for content and package of LDIs so that they support health reform strategies of the DOH under the Universal Health Care Agenda. 

d. Forge contracts (i.e. MOU, Terms of Reference) with PRC-accredited and CHED-recognized LDI providers for the design, delivery and evaluation of LDIs. 

2. Section for Planning and Assessment 

a. Supervise the conduct of LGU Learning and Development Assessment (LDNA) and consolidation of LDNA Plan in accordance with the provisions of Administrative Order No. 2014-0044 “Guidelines for the Installation of Human Resource for Health Management and Development Systems for Health and Allied Health Professionals Employed within a Service Delivery Network (SDN, including the Assessment and Monitoring of Clinical Competencies, Baseline Competencies and Standards” 

b. Review, consolidate and streamline Learning and Development Plans of LGUs, including private service providers in SDNs and those of other health- related sectors to ensure compliance with policies and standards as well as efﬁcient delivery of LDIs. 

c. Develop monitoring and evaluation indicators to measure LDI effectiveness and improvement of HRH performance in the workplace. 

d. Coordinate with LDD for the integration and streamlining of Learning and Development Plans 

3. Section for Research and Development 

a. Identify and map learning and development institutions that can be certiﬁed as DOH Academy providers, based on QA policies set by the section on Policies, Accreditation and Partnerships. 

b. In partnership with PRC, CHED, TESDA, DOH Central Ofﬁce Bureaus and the DOH Academy-certiﬁed providers, design and develop competency- based LDIs and modules appropriate for each ofﬁce/job family/subject area/personnel category and level of competency. 

c. Develop appropriate learning and development platforms/modes of delivery of LDIs for different categories of HRH including, but not limited to: 

i. On—site workplace learning, face-to-face session, case-based problem—solving methods, service on technical or research committees 

ii. Classroom sessions, short-courses, certiﬁcate courses (either on- campus or off-campus) 

iii. Multi—media, open distance learning, online and ofﬂine blended learning, 

iv. Non-formal learning (i.e. job rotation, coaching and mentoring, shadowing) 

v. Communities of practice, knowledge-transfer activities 

vi. Conferences, fora, seminars and workshops 

d. In coordination with partner academic institutions, conduct operations research periodically or as necessary, for the following purposes: 

i. As a basis for policy development, course design and development 

ii. To assess relevance and effectiveness of LDIs in improving HRH performance and eventual improvement in health outcomes 

iii. To assess the responsiveness to client and health sector needs 

4. Section for Implementation of LDIs a. Coordinate with DOH Academy providers for the efﬁcient delivery of LDIs by: 

i. Linking clients from LGU health facilities including private service providers in SDNs and other health—related sectors to appropriate DOH Academy providers nearest their vicinity 

ii. Facilitating and managing direct enrollment of its clients to HEIs and other DOH Academy providers

iii. Overseeing the implementation/provision of LDIs and monitoring progress of HRH education and training 

b. Implement mechanisms and guidelines in the delivery of LDIs in accordance with DOH HHRDB policies on management of training and development programs. 

E. Framework of LDIs 

1. LDIs shall be packaged using the competency—based approach and following the six strategic instruments of Universal Health Care: a) Health Service Delivery, b) Health Financing, c) Health Regulation, (1) Health Governance, e) Health Information Technology, and f) Human Resources for Health 

2. Delivery of LDIs shall be made appropriate for the following categories of personnel: a) frontline; b) technical and rank & ﬁle staff, c) middle managers; and (1) top management 

F. Monitoring and Evaluation 

The DOH Academy shall develop systems, policies and standards to regularly monitor and evaluate the following: 

1.  Performance of the DOH Academy 

2. Performance of DOH Academy LDI Providers 

3. Effectiveness and relevance of DOH Academy LDIs 

4. Workplace Competency and proﬁciency of HRH trained under the DOH Academy 


VII. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. 

A. The Director IV of the HHRDB shall: 

1. Provide strategic guidance, direction and policy instruments for the DOH Academy. 

2. Be responsible for overall supervision and management of the DOH Academy Section Heads 

3. Monitor whether the" functions and deliverables of the DOH Academy are aligned with the strategies of the DOH. 

4. Create additional functions and units as necessary 

5. Appoint Section Heads and oversee the selection of team members 

B. The Section Heads of the DOH Academy shall: 
 

1. Be responsible for overall supervision and management of their respective Section 

2. Coordinate and streamline operations of their Section with those of other Sections 

3. Submit Work and Financial Plans and other relevant reports to the Director of the DOH Academy. 

4. Establish and maintain effective relationships with DOH Academy partners as well as technical advisers to carry out the functions of their Sections effectively. 

C. The DOH Health-Human Resource Development Bureau shall: 

1. Through the Learning and Development Division (LDD), capacitate DOH Regional Ofﬁces to provide technical assistance to LGUs in the installation of HRHMD systems, conduct of LDNAs and development of Learning and Development plans 

2. Develop coordination mechanisms between and among the LDD and the DOH Academy for the provision of LDIs to DOH ofﬁces. 

3.Coordinate with the different DOH Central Ofﬁce Bureaus and subject matter experts in the design and development of LDI modules. 

4. Allocate funds for the operations of the DOH Academy unit. It can also pool resources from training programs dedicated to the LGU HRH and allocations from the sin tax (RA 10351) funds for the upgrading of competencies of HRH in the Service Delivery Networks 

D. DOH Central Ofﬁce Bureaus shall: 

1. Coordinate with the DOH Academy in standardizing and streamlining all LDIs being provided to the LGUs and SDN. 

2. In coordination with the DOH Academy, serve as subject matter experts in the design and development of standard modules in their respective ﬁelds/areas of expertise. 



E. The DOH Regional Ofﬁces shall: 

1. Coordinate with DOH Academy LDI providers and academic partners for the provision of LDIs to HRH in LGU health facilities including private service providers in SDNs and other ofﬁces and organizations within the health sector. 

2. Provide technical assistance to LGUs in the conduct of LDNAs and development of Learning and Development Plans. 

F. Local Government Units shall: 

1. Install their respective LGU HRHMDS 1n accordance with A0 No. 2014- 0044. 

2. Conduct LDNA of HRH in their health facilities including private service providers within their SDN 

3. Submit their SDN Learning and Development Plan to the DOH Academy who - will coordinate with a partner academic institution or provider in their particular region or province for the provision of the appropriate LDIs. 

VIII. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

All other provisions which are consistent with the foregoing shall remain valid and in effect. 

IX. REPEALING CLAUSE 

All other orders, policies, rules and regulations that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Order are hereby repealed, amended or modiﬁed accordingly. 

XI. EFFECTIVITY 

This order shall take effect 15 days upon publication in an ofﬁcial gazette. 

</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>


