Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>04/22/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0015 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implemeting Rules and Regulation of Republic Act No. 8345, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the East Avenue Medical Center, Located in East Avenue, Quezon City, from Three Hundred and Fiftv (350) to Six Hundred Beds, Upgrading the Service Facilities and Professional Health Care Therein, and Appropriating Funds Therefor”</subject>
<body>




I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The Government Service Insurance System (GSIS) General Hospital which was established in 1969 to provide medical services exclusively to GSIS members was the precursor of the East Avenue Medical Center. In 1978, by virtue of Presidential Decree 1411 the GSIS operations were transferred to the Ministry of Health (MOH) and was named Hospital ng Bagong Lipunan (HBL) in which extended services to non-GSIS members as well. It was in 1986 that the HBL was renamed as the East Avenue Medical Center or the EAMC when Hon. Corazon C. Aquino was proclaimed as the President of the Philippines. 

August 25, 1997, Republic Act 8345 “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the East Avenue Medical Center Located in East Avenue, Quezon City from Three Hundred and Fifty (350) to Six Hundred (600) Beds, Upgrading the Service Facilities and Professional Health Care Therein, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” was signed into law. 

The passage of the law in 1997 was not provided with appropriate budgetary suppOrt, but the EAMC Management exerted all efforts to augment its budgetary allocation by mobilizing - external resources such as those from the DOH Central Ofﬁce, Local Government Units, Department of Social Welfare and Development, and non-government organizations and private foundations. 

For the last 45 years, EAMC has committed to the objectives of: 1) providing high quality standard of medical care to the optimum number of populace irrespective of their social, educations, cultural economic and religious creed: 2) training and teaching resident physicians, nursing, students afﬁliates, allied professionals and administrative staff to give them opportunities to develop their proﬁciencies in their respective lines of specialization, and 3) conducting relevant research programs. Aside from its mandates, EAMC has a vision to be globally competitive, a center of excellence and a premier DOH Level 3 general hospital. 

As a national government health facility located in Quezon City, the EAMC plays a crucial role in the health delivery network in Metro Manila and nationwide, implementing various programs and services such as Emergency Room — Trauma and Eye Center, National Reference Laboratory, Tahan—tahanan, Skin Center, and Maxillo-facial Center among others. 


Thus the provision of RA 8345, speciﬁcally increasing the EAMC bed capacity to 600 must be implemented without further delay and with appropriate funding. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This Administrative Order sets the ImplementingRules and Regulation for the implementation of Republic Act No. 8345 otherwise known as “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the East Avenue Medical Center Located in East Avenue, Quezon City, from Three Hundred and Fifty (350) to Six Hundred (600) Beds, Upgrading the Service Facilities and Professional Health Care Therein, and Appropriate Funds Therefor.” 

III. DEFINITION OF TERMS/ACRONYMS 

1. AO No. 2012-0012 — refers to “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines” dated July 18, 2012. 

2. DOH — refers to the Department of Health. 

3. EAMC — refers to East Avenue Medical Center 

4. IRR- refers to Implementing Rules and Regulations 

5. Level 3 — refers to DOH classiﬁcation of Hospitals as deﬁned by AO No. 2012- 0012 

6. Republic Act No. 8345 — refers to “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the East Avenue Medical Center Located in East Avenue, Quezon City, from Three Hundred and Fifty (350) to Six Hundred (600) Beds, Upgrading the Service Facilities and Professinal Health Care Therein, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” 

7. Tahan-tahanan — refers to the half—way house provided for indigent cancer patients from far ﬂung areas. 


IV. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The EAMC shall provide a tertiary level of promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative health care services and serve as an institution for training and research. It shall be fully equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 3 health care facility. 

The EAMC shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital in Metro Manila and the regions. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the updated Development Plan of EAMC. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of the implementation of RA 8345, the following guidelines should be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

The EAMC shall operate as a 600 bed Level 3 general hospital with the following additional services namely: Eye center, Skin Center, Comprehensive Dental services, Maxillo—facial Center, Birthing Center, Emergency Room — Trauma and Extended high end Diagnostic Center, State of the art Hospital wards, Toxicology Services, Animal Bite Center, Dialysis Center, Respiratory and Pulmonary Center, Family Medicine, and Employees Welfare and Wellness Center. 

The EAMC shall be continuously upgraded to be a fully operational 600 — bed Level 3 general hospital. Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established based on the Hospital Development Plan. The increase in bed capacity and commensurate services and health human resource complement provided by the Act shall be achieved by CY 2016. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The EAMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource. The hospital shall evaluate the existing human health resource requirements, re-classify and/or upgrade positions, promote professional development and hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards. 

The EAMC shall increase its health personnel based on recommended stafﬁng pattern for a 600 bed capacity hospital and envisioned health services following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-1, “Revised Standards and Organizational Structure and Stafﬁng Pattern of Government Hospitals,” CY 2013 Edition dated 23 September 2013. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All assets, movable and immovable, and records of the Balance sheet or General Book of Account of EAMC as well as its liabilities and organizations shall be properly updated and accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 4. Equipment The EAMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH standards of a Level 3 general hospital as provided for under DOH AO No. 2012—0012. Additional equipment and facilities necessary for the expansion of services shall be provided according. 


5. Infrastructure 

The EAMC shall implement and seek the support of the Department of Health in the construction/repair/renovation of physical structures to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with “Hospital Safe from Disasters Program” among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The EAMC shall develop and sustain standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The EAMC shall implement and maintain the quality management system conformance with ISO 9001:2008 standards provided by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Philhealth) and other health standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

IV. IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control 

The highest DOH-designated ofﬁcial for the Ofﬁce of Technical Services shall have oversight jurisdiction and control over the hospital operations of EAMC. 

The Medical Center Chief of EAMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce which shall be used in aid of planning and decision making pertaining to hospital upgrading. 

B. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provision of Republic Act No. 8345 shall be resourced out accordingly. 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes Philhealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations. 

2. The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from GAA, hospital income, Philhealth payments, public-private partnership and other sources. 


3. Personal services to carry out the full implementation of the Act shall be sourced from the GAA and other sources in compliance with DOH—DBM Joint Circular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

4. Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority upon recommendation of the Ofﬁce of Technical Services. 

V. REPEALING / SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provisions from previous issuance that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any 

court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VI. EFFECTIVITY 

This order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>
<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>
