Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
<date>04/22/2015</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2015 - 0014 </docnum>
<subject>SUBJECT: Implementing Rules and Regulations 0f Republic Act No. 9419, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center from One Hundred Fifty (150) to Three Hundred (300) Beds, and Appropriating Funds Therefor” </subject>
<body>


I. RATIONALE/BACKGROUND 

The “Marikina Emergency Hospital” with an authorized bed capacity of 25 beds was created by virtue Republic Act (RA) No. 3862 of 1964. Another Act of Congress passed on July 1969, renamed the hospital as Eulogio Rodriguez Sr. Memorial Hospital (ERSMH). By 1977, ERSMH became a 100—bed' tertiary provincial hospital and started departmentalization in 1979, and in May 1984, the hospital began participating in the Internship Training Program of the Association of the Philippine Medical Colleges (APMC). 

Executive Order No. 119 dated January 20, 1987 mandated the reorganization of the Department of Health and the ERSMH became the hospital component of the District Health Ofﬁce No. II of the National Capital Region (NCR). In 1992, RA No. 7209 increased the hospital bed capacity from 100 to 150 beds. RA No. 8019 of 1995 upgraded the hospital into a Medical Center and renamed it as Amang Rodriguez Medical Center (ARMC). 

Inﬁastructure development was started in 1999, and ARMC became a recipient of the French Financial Protocole Project resulting to the upgrading of the hospital’s equipment and facilities. Human resource also grew at a fast pace, with the hospital offering specialty and subspecialty services and the different departments having their residency training programs accredited. ARMC has continually developed into an institution recognized for its pro-poor advocacy, its competent professional staff, quality training programs and outstanding research. Training of medical and paramedical professionals gained continuous recognition by the academe and the public. 

On February 19, 2007, RA No. 9419, “An Act of Increasing the Bed Capacity of the Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center form One Hundred Fifty (150) to Three Hundred (300) Beds and Appropriating Funds Therefor” was approved. The hospital was then resumed as Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center (ARMMC). equipment, ongoing infrastructure projects, hospital vehicles, drugs, supplies and important However, on September 26,2009 typhoon “Ondoy” severely damaged state—of-the—art w hospital records. After typhoon “Ondoy”, rehabilitation of the hospital became utmost priority. Since then, the hospital has steadily regained the acceptance and preference of the public and the population it has served. Through the full implementation of RA No. 9419 with all its provisions, ARMMC shall be premiere Medical Center of its catchment area, the eastern part of Metro Manila and the province of Rizal. 

II. OBJECTIVE 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations to fast track the implementation of the RA No. 9419, “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center from One Hundred Fifty (150) to Three Hundred (300) Beds and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” 

III. DEFINITION OF TERMS / ACRONYMS 

1. AO No. 2012-0012 — refers to “Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of Hospitals and other Health Facilities in the Philippines”, dated July 1 8 ,2012. 

2. ARMMC — refers to Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center 

3. Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds offered by the hospital for inpatient care. 

4. Departmentalization — the formation of specialized functional area or unit that is distinct from other function areas in the organization. 

5. IHOMP — refers to Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program. 

6. IRR — refers to Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 9419. 

7. Level 3 — refers to the DOH Classiﬁcation of ARMMC as deﬁned by A0 No. 2012- 0012 

8. Referral Hospital — refers to a health care institution capable of accepting referrals from other health care facilities. 

9. Republic Act (RA) — refers to RA No. 9419 “An act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Amang Rodriguez Memorial Medical Center from One Hundred Fifty (150) to Three Hundred (300) Beds and Appropriating Funds Therefor” 

IV. POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 

A. General Policies 

The ARMMC shall provide a tertiary level of promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative healthcare services and research. It shall be fully equipped with state-of- the—art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequate trained and competent health human resources as appropriate for a licensed and accredited Level 3 general hospital. 

Furthermore, the ARMMC shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity while continually serving as a referral hospital. The increase in bed capacity shall be consisted with the Development Plan of ARMMC. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support of the implementation of RA No. 9419, the following guidelines shall be implemented: 

1. Expansion of Services 

The ARMMC shall operate as a 300 bed Level 3 general hospital with additional services on mother and child health care, emergency room-trauma, high end radiologic services. Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established based on the Hospital Development Plan. The incremental increase in bed capacity and commensurate services provided by the Act shall be achieved by the end of CY 2015. 

2. Health Human Resource 

The ARMMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource, re—classify and upgrade positions, promote professional development and hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All assets, movable and immovable, and records of the ARMMC as well its liabilities and obligations shall be properly updated and shall be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The ARMMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH standards of a Level 3 general hospital as provided for under A0 No. 2012—012. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of the DOH and other agencies. 

5. Infrastructure 

The ARMMC shall implement and seek the support of the DOH for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws, licensing standards and current international standards for hospitals buildings in line with “Hospital Safe from Disasters Program”, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The ARMMC shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health works and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The ARMMC shall implement the quality management system in conformance with the standards of ISO:9001:2008, standards recommended by the DOH, the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth) and other health standards of international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

IMPLEMENTING STRUCTURE 

A. Administrative Control

The highest DOH-designated ofﬁcial of the Ofﬁce of Technical Services shall have oversight jurisdiction and control over the hospital operations of ARMMC. 

The Medical Center Chief of ARMMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit development plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH Central Ofﬁce. 

B. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of Republic Act No. 9419 shall be sourced out accordingly. 

1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes Philhealth payments, Public—Private Partnership (PPP) and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme. 

2. The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, Philhealth payments, PPP and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme. 

3. Personal Services to carry out the full implementation of the hospital stafﬁng pattern for a 300 Bed Capacity shall be implemented by trances as provided by DOH- DBM Joint CirCular 2013-01 dated September 23, 2013 and other related issuances. 

4. Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by appropriate authority upon recommendation of the Ofﬁce of Technical Services. 

VI. REPEALING/ SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 

Provision of previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VII. EFFECTIVITY 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in. Ofﬁcial Gazette and newspaper of general circulation. 

</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, M.D., MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Acting Secretary of Health</signtitle>
