Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>JUN 30, 2016</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2016 - 0030</docnum>

<subject>Subject: Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10770 “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center, Located in Cebu City. From Eight Hundred (800) to One Thousand Two Hundred (1,200) Bed Capacity and Appropriating Funds Therefor”</subject>

<body>
I. Rationale/Background 

On January 12, 1913, pursuant to Act 2725, the Southern Islands Hospital was ofﬁcially opened to the public with an authorized 30 bed capacity. In 1984, through a DOH issuance the hospital was upgraded into a Medical Center and licensed as a tertiary teaching and training institution with an authorized bed capacity of 350 beds. 

On May 21, 1992, the name Southern Islands Hospital was renamed to Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center (VSMMC) pursuant to RA 7528, in honor of the late Senator Vicente Sotto, Sr., the philanthropist who extended ﬁnancial assistance to patients in this Medical Center. On June 1, 1992, RA 7588 was approved increasing the bed capacity of VSMMC from 150 beds to 400 beds. 

On June 22, 1998, Republic Act No. 8658 was approved increasing the bed capacity of VSMMC from 400 to 800 beds. VSMMC is the largest government end referral tertiary health care facility in Central Visayas. For CY 2013—2015 the average occupancy rate of Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center in three (3) years is 128.95% of which majority of case mix are tertiary in nature. Considering the inﬂux of patients, RA 10770 “An Act Increasing The Bed Capacity of Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center, Located in Cebu City, From Eight Hundred (800) to One Thousand Two Hundred (1,200) Bed Capacity, And Appropriating Funds Therefor” was approved on April 26, 2016.  

Presently, the VSMMC is implementing its new direction with the development of Specialty and Sub-specialties under the different clinical departments. These Specialty and Subspecialties include the General Surgery, Neuro Surgery, Uro—Surgery, Internal Medicine, ObstetricsGynecology, Orthopedics, Otorhinolaryngology, Ophthalmology, Anesthesiology, Pathology, Psychiatry, Radiology, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Emergency Medicine (which is the ﬁrst of its kind outside Metro Manila); Family Medicine and Pediatrics, Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Dental Services Unit , and the National Voluntary Blood Services Program. 

II. Objective 

This Administrative Order sets the Implementing Rules and Regulations of RA. No. 10770 “An Act Increasing the Bed Capacity of Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center, Located in Cebu City, From Eight Hundred (800) to One Thousand Two Hundred (1,200) Bed Capacity, and Appropriating Funds Therefor.” I 

III. Scope 

The Rules and Regulations discussed in this Administrative Order shall only pertain to RA. 10770. - 

IV. Deﬁnition of Terms/Acronyms 

1. Act - refers to Republic Act No. 10770 “An Act Increasing The Bed Capacity of Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center From Eight Hundred ( 800) bed Capacity to One Thousand Two Hundred (1,200 ) Bed capacity, And Appropriating Funds Therefor” 

2. AO 2012-0012-A —— refers to the “Amendment to Administrative Order (A.O.) No. 2012-0012 Rules and Regulations Governing the New Classiﬁcation of ; Hospitals and Other Health Facilities in the Philippines dated September 3, 2015. 

3. Bed Capacity — refers to the number of beds made available for inpatient care 

4. Bed Occupancy Rate (BOR) — refers to the ratio of actual inpatient service days for a given period to the declared bed capacity of the hospital for the same period. 

5. DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01- “Revised Organizational Structure and Standard Stafﬁng Standards for Government Hospitals, CY 2013 Edition” dated 23 September 2013. 

6. Level 3 Hospital —as classiﬁed in AO No. 2012-0012-A, September 3, 2015 

7. Referral Hospital — refers to a health care institution capable of accepting referrals from lower level hospitals and renders general and specialized health care services. - 

8. Medical Center — refers to a hospital staffed and equipped to care for many patients and a large number of kinds of diseases and dysfunctions using modern technology. 

9. VSMMC — refers to Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center 

V. Policies and Guidelines 

A. General Policies 

The VSMMC shall provide a tertiary level of promotive, curative, preventive, rehabilitative health care services and research. It shall be fully equipped with state of the art equipment and facilities, complemented by adequately trained and competent health human resources as apprOpriate for a licensed and aceredited Level 3 health care facility. The increase in bed capacity shall be consistent with the Hospital Development Plan of VSMMC. 

Furthermore, the VSMMC shall strengthen its existing services and aim for the improvement of its service capability and capacity While continually serving as a referral hospital, complementing the services of local government health care facilities in the province and the region. 

B. Implementing Mechanisms 

In support to the implementation of the Act, the following guidelines shall be implemented: ' 

1. Expansion of Services 

The VSMMC shall operate as a Level 3 hospital with the following services: General Surgery, Neuro Surgery, Uro-Surgery, Internal Medicine, Obstetrics- Gynecology, Orthopedics, Otorhinolaryngology, Ophthalmology, Anesthesiology, Pathology, Psychiatry, Radiology, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Emergency Medicine (which is the ﬁrst of its kind outside Metro Manila); Family Medicine and Pediatrtics, Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Trauma Medicine, Respiratory Theraphy Unit, Heart Institute , Kidney Transplantation, Renal Center, Perinatal Center , Dental Services Unit , and the National Voluntary BloOd Services Program , Oncology Clinic , Electro-encephalogram and Seizure Clinic, Wellness and Occupational and OFW Health Clinic, and be continuously upgraded to be a ﬁllly operational 1,200-bed Level 3 hospital by year 2018. 

Structural reorganization with additional services shall be established based on the Hospital Development Plan. The incremental annual increase in bed capacity and commensurate services provided by the Act shall be achieved by the end of year 2018. ' 

2. Health Human Resource 

In case of detailed employees and/or deployment of staff as result of the DOH Rationalization Plan, the VSMMC shall continue to honor the positions, security of tenure and other rights of its human resource complement. The hospital shall evaluate the existing health human resource complement, re-classify and /or propose upgrading of positions, promote professional development and shall hire additional staff to comply and conform to the DOH standards pursuant to the purpose and intent of RA No. 10770. 

The VSMMC shall implement the maximum stafﬁng standards following the DBM-DOH Joint Circular No. 2013-01 including provisions in its ﬁlture amendments/revisions on standard for hospital with bed capacity beyond 500. 

3. Assets and Liabilities 

All movable and immovable assets, liabilities and obligations as well as records of the VSMMC shall be properly updated and shall be accounted for in accordance with existing policies and guidelines. 

4. Equipment 

The VSMMC shall make an inventory of the existing hospital equipment and undertake upgrading to conform to DOH minimum standards of a Level 3 hospital as provided for under DOH AO No. 2012—0012-A, and other regulatory agencies. Additional equipment and facilities that will complement the expansion of services shall be procured with the support of DOH until the hospital attains its mandated status. 

5. Infrastructure 

The VSMMC shall implement and seek the support of DOH for the construction/repair/renovation of physical infrastructure to conform to all existing laws and licensing standards and current international standards for hospital buildings in line with Hospital Safe from Disasters Program, among others. 

6. Systems Development 

The VSMMC shall develop and sustain the standards of hospital operations to provide quality patient care and safety for patients, health workers and clientele of the hospital. It shall implement an electronic information system conforming to the basic requirements of the Integrated Hospital Operations and Management Program (IHOMP). 

7. Quality Management 

The VSMMC shall enhance and implement Continuing Quality Improvement Program (CQIP), Patient Safety, DOH policies and regulations, standards of hospital operations prescribed in the DOH-Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB) manuals, Health Facilities and Services Regulatory Bureau (HFSRB), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Philhealth) and other health organization standards provided by international health organizations which are supportive of existing local and national standards. 

VI. Implementing Structure 

1. Administrative Control 

The Medical Center Chief of VSMMC shall be accountable and responsible for the implementation of quality standard hospital operations and management and shall submit developmental plans, ﬁnancial and statistical reports to the DOH- Central Ofﬁce through the DOH Regional Ofﬁce VII. 

The DOH Regional Ofﬁce VII shall have oversight jurisdiction over the hospital operations of VSMMC. It shall monitor the implementation of the Act and may recommend further necessary upgrading guided by this Administrative Order. 

Further, the Health Facility Development Bureau (HFDB) shall provide the needed technical assistance in line with the hospital upgrading, development and capacity building. 

2. Sourcing and Use of Funds 

The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of RA No. 10770 shall be sourced out accordingly: 

2.1. Capital investment for infrastructure and equipment shall be sourced from the DOH General Appropriations Act (GAA), hospital income which includes PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and other modes of ﬁnancing scheme subject to prevailing government rules and regulations; 

2.2. The additional Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) resulting from the hospital expansion shall be sourced from the GAA, hospital income, PhilHealth payments, public-private partnership and/or other modes of ﬁnancing scheme; 

2.3. Personnel Services (PS) shall be appropriated to carry out the full implementation of the standard stafﬁng pattern of 1,200 beds; and 

2.4.Release of funds from the DOH shall be approved by the appropriate authority. 

VII. Repealing / Separability Clause 

Provisions from previous issuances that are inconsistent or contrary to the provisions of this Order are hereby rescinded and modiﬁed accordingly. 

If any provision of this Order is declared unauthorized or rendered invalid by any court of law or competent authority, those provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and effective. 

VIII. Effectivity 

This Order shall take effect ﬁfteen (15) days after publication in the Oﬂicial Gazette or in a newspaper of general circulation. 
</body>

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, MD, MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>

