Republic of the Philippines
Department of Health
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY

<date>JUN 30, 2016</date>
<doctype>ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER</doctype>
<docnum>No. 2016 - 0031</docnum>

<subject>SUBJECT: Adoption of the Revised Merit Promotion Plan (MPP) for the Department of Health, and all its Ofﬁces, Bureaus and Hospitals</subject>


<body>
I. RATIONALE 

Section 32, Chapter 5, Book 5 of Executive Order No. 292 provides the establishment of merit promotion plans which shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Service laws and rules, regulations and standards promulgated by the Civil Service Commission (CSC). ‘ 

The Merit Promotion Plan (MPP) of the Department of Health (DOH) was approved by the CSC in 2002 with the following objectives: 

1. Establish a system that is characterized by strict observance of the merit, ﬁtness and equality principles in the selection of employees for appointment to positions in the career and non-career service in all levels; and 

2. Create equal opportunities for employment to all qualiﬁed men and women to enter the government service and for career development in the Department without discrimination on account of gender, age, civil status, disability, religion, and ethnicity. 

However, with the recent changes in the DOH organizational structure and reforms as mandated by Executive Order No. 366 and approval of the standardized stafﬁng, as well as expansion of the hospitals/rehabilitation centers coupled with the new issuances from the CSC , the existing DOH MPP needs to be revised in order to harmonize and align this with the current DOH structure. 

II. OBJECTIVES 

This Order is being issued to provide guidance to all DOH employees in the recruitment, selection and. hiring (regular, casual, contractual, and job order or contract of service). ‘ 

III. SCOPE OF APPLICATION 

This Order shall apply to all ofﬁCes in the DOH: Central Ofﬁce, Regional Ofﬁces, Hospitals, Sanitaria, Treatment and Rehabilitation Centers, Mental Health Facilities, Food and Drugs Administration, and Bureau of Quarantine. This shall also apply to the attached agencies and specialty hospitals under the DOH. ' 

IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS 

A. Career Service - positions in the civil service characterized by: (1) entrance based. on merit and ﬁtness to be determined, as far as practicable, by competitive ”examinations or based on highly technical qualiﬁcations; (2) opportunity for advancement to higher career positions; and. (3) security of tenure. 

B. Non-career - positions expressly declared by law to be in the non-career service; or those whose entrance in the service is characterized by: (1) entrance on bases other than those of the usual tests of merit and ﬁtness utilized for the career service; and (2) tenure which is limited to the duration of a particular project for which purpose of employment was made. 

C. First level Positions - shall include clerical, trades and crafts, and custodial service which involve sub—professional work in a non—supervisory or supervisory capacity 

D. Second Level Positions - involve professional, technical and scientiﬁc work in a non- supervisory or supervisory capacity up to Division Chief level or its equivalent. ‘

E. Second Level Executive/Managerial Positions - include professional, _ technical and scientiﬁc positions, the functions of which are managerial in character, exercising management over people, resource; and/or policy and exercising functions such as planning, organizing, directing, coordinating, ' controlling and overseeing the activities of an organization, a unit thereof or of a group, requiring some degree of professional, technical or scientiﬁc knowledge and experience, application of managerial skills required to carry out basic duties and responsibilities involving leadership, functional guidance and control. These positions require intensive and thorough knowledge of a specialized. ﬁeld. 

F. Third Level Positions - generally require either Career Service Executive Eligibility (CSE'E) or Career Executive Service Eligibility (CESE). This includes the Undersecretary, Assistant Secretary, Bureau Director, Assistant Bureau Director, Regional Director, Assistant Regional Director, Chief of Department Services and other ofﬁcers of its equivalent rank. 

G. Qualiﬁcation Standards - a statement of the minimum qualiﬁcations for a position which shall include education, experience, training and civil service eligibility. 

H. System of Ranking Positions (SRP) - Refers to the hierarchical arrangement of positions from highest to . lowest, which shall be a guide in determining which position is next-in-rank, taking into consideration the following: 
a. Organizational structure; 
b. Salary grade allocation; 
c. Classiﬁcation and functional relationship of positions; and 
d. Geographical location. 

I. Next-in-rank Position - refers to a position which by reason of the hierarchical arrangement of positions in the agency or in the government is determined to be in the nearest degree of relationship to a high-er position as contained in the SRP. 

J. Qualiﬁed Next- in—Rank - refers to an employee appointed on a permanent status to a position next-in-rank to the vacancy as reﬂected in the SRP approved by the head of. agency and who meets the requirements for appointment to the next higher position. 

K. Personnel actions - any action denoting the movement or progress of personnel in the civil service such as original appointment, promotion, transfer, reinstatement, reemployment, detail, reassignment, secondment . and demotion. 

L. Selection - is the systematic method of determining the merit and ﬁtness of a person on the basis of qualiﬁcations and ability to perform the duties and responsibilities of the positions. 

M. Selection Line- up - is a listing of qualiﬁed and competent applicants for consideration to avacancy which includes but not limited to the comparative information of their education, experience, training, civil service eligibility, performance rating (if applicable), relevant working accomplishments, physical ' characteristics, psycho—social attributes, personality traits and potential. 

N. Psycho—social Attributes - refer to the characteristics or traits of a person which involved both psychological and social aspects. Psychological includes the way he/she perceives things, ideas, beliefs and understanding and how he/she acts and. relates these things to others and in social situations. 

O. Superior Qualiﬁcations - shall mean outstanding relevant work accomplishments, educational attainment and training appropriate for the position to be ﬁlled. It shall include demonstration of exceptional job mastery and potential in major areas of responsibility. 

P. Deep Selection - is the process of selecting a candidate for appointment who is not next-in-rank but possesses superior qualiﬁcations and competence. 

Q. Discrimination - is a situation wherein a qualiﬁed applicant is not included in the selection line-up and evaluation by the Selection and Promotion Board (SPB) on account of age, gender, civil status, pregnancy, disability, religion, ethnicity or political afﬁliation. 


V. GENERAL GUIDELINES 

A. Selection of employees for appointment in all ofﬁces in the Department shall be open to all qualiﬁed men and women according to the principle of merit and ﬁtness. 

There shall be equal employment opportunity for men and women at all levels of position in the agency, provided they meet the minimum requirements of the position to be ﬁlled. 

B. The Merit Promotion Plan (MPP) shall cover positions in the ﬁrst, second, second level executive/managerial, and third level and shall also include original appointments and other related personnel actions. 

There shall be no discrimination in the selection of employees on the account of age, gender, civil status, disability, religion, ethnicity, or political afﬁliation. 

C. When a position in the ﬁrst, second, second level executive-managerial or third level becomes vacant, applicants for employment who are competent, qualiﬁed and posSess appropriate civil service eligibility shall be considered for permanent appointment. Exemptions are those physicians under the residency training program, immediate post-residency and a fellowship program in level 3 hospitals. 

In addition to the required qualiﬁcations, applicants for second level executive/managerial and third level positions must possess executive and managerial competence. 

VI. IMPLEMENTING GUIDELINES 

A. Posting and Publication of Vacant positions 

1. Vacant positions marked. for ﬁlling shall be published in accordance with Republic Act 7041 dated 1991 (Publication Law). The published vacant positions shall also be posted in at least three (3) conspicuous places in the agency for at least ten (10) calendar days. Other appropriate modes of publication shall be considered. 

Filling of vacant positions shall be made after ten (10) calendar days from their publication. 

The publication of a particular vacant position shall be valid until ﬁlled up but not to extend beyond six (6) months reckoned. from the date the vacant position was published. 

In the issuance of appointments, the requirement for publication is'deemed complied with if the process of application and screening started within six (6) months from publication and if the vacancy is ﬁlled not later than nine (9) months from the date of publication. 

2. The following positions are exempted from the publication requirement: 

a. Primarily conﬁdential positions; 
b. Positions which are policy determining; 
c. Highly technical positions; 
d. Other non-career positions; '- 
e. Positions to be ﬁlled by existing regular employees in the department in case of reorganization; 
f. Substitute appointments where appointees come from outside the agency. However, should the position be ﬁlled by regular appointment, candidates for the position should be screened and passed upon by the Selection and Promotions Board (SPB). 


B. Selection and Promotions Board (SPB) 

1. The agency head shall, as far as practicable, ensure equal opportunity regardless of gender to be represented in the” SPB for all levels. 

2. The SPB in the ﬁrst and second. level positions shall be established in the Central Ofﬁce, Regional Ofﬁces, -- Hospitals, Sanitaria, Treatment and Rehabilitation Centers, Mental Health Facilities, FDA and Bureau of Quarantine preferably with the following Composition: ‘ 

2.1. Chairperson - career service representative designated by the Agency Head; 

2.2. Vice Chairperson - Division Chief; 

2.3. Members

a. any authorized career service representative of the organizational unit where the vacancy is; 

b. Human Resource Management Ofﬁcer or the career service employee directly responsible for personnel management; and 

c. Representatives of rank-and-ﬁle career employees from the ﬁrst level for applicants of ﬁrst level poSitions or from the second level for applicants of second level positions, who shall be chosen by the duly accredited employee association in the agency. 

The Human Resource Management Ofﬁce shall serve as the secretariat of the board. ' ' 

3. For second—level executive/managerial and third level positions: 

3.1 Chairperson - Undersecretary of Ofﬁce for Policy and Health Systems 

3.2 Vice Chairperson — Undersecretary designated by the Secretary of Health 

3.3 Members 

a. Career Executive Ofﬁcers to be designated by the Secretary of Health;

b. Representatives from the Regional Ofﬁces, Hospitals and TRCs. 

4. Special Selection Board in every Regional Ofﬁce and Metro Manila Hospitals to evaluate applicants for Division Chief positions in the Hospital/TRC: 

4.1. Chairperson - Director III (or its equivalent) 

4.2. Vice-chairperson - Chief of Hospital (or its equivalent) 

4.3. Members: 

a. Designated representative of the Chief of the Hospital/TRC where the vacancy is; 

b. The Human Resource Management Ofﬁcer where the vacancy is; 

c. Representative of rank—and-ﬁle career employees from the second level who shall be chosen by the duly accredited employee association in the agency. 

d. The Human Resource Management Ofﬁce where the vacancy is will serve as the secretariat of the board. 

In case there is no accredited employee association in the agency, the representatives shall be chosen at large by the employees through a general assembly. The candidate who garnered the second highest votes shall automatically be the alternate representative. Any other mode of selection may be conducted for the purpose. 

5. The Chairperson and Vice-chairperson may serve for a maximum period of two (2) years. For continuity of operation, the agency-accredited employee association may designate an alternate for ﬁrst level and second level rank- and-ﬁle employee representatives. 

6. The SPB members including alternate representatives for ﬁrst, second and third level positions shall undergo orientation and workshop on the selectionfpromotion process and CSC policies and appointments. 

7. All candidates for appointment to ﬁrst and second level positions shall be screened by the SPB. Candidates for appointment to third level positions shall be screened by the SPB for third level positions composed of at least three (3) career executive service ofﬁcials as may be constituted in the agency. 

C. Procedure in the Selection and Promotion Board (SPB) 

1. Appointment to the following positions shall no longer be screened by the SPB:

1.1. Substitute appointment due to their short duration and emergency nature. However, should the position be "ﬁlled by regular appointment, candidates for the position should be screened and passed upon by the 

1.2. Appointment to personal and primarily conﬁdential positions. 

2. For vacancies in the ﬁrst and second levels, all qualiﬁed next-in-rank employees shall be automatically considered candidates for promotion to the next higher position. However, qualiﬁed next-in-rank employees shall signify their intention to apply in writing and submit the complete requirements for application. Failure to do so shall automatically waive their right to be included as candidates. ' 

3. The SPB shall maintain fairness and impartiality in the assessment of candidates for appointment. Towards this end, the SPB may employ the assistance of external or independent resource persons and may initiate innovative schemes in determining the best and most qualiﬁed candidate. 

4. The comparative competence and qualiﬁcation of candidates for appointment shall be determined on the basis of: 

4.1. Performance 

a. For appointment by promotion, the performance rating of the appointee for the last rating period prior to the effectivity date of the appointment should be at least very satisfactory. 

b. For appointment by transfer, the performance rating for the last rating period immediately preceding the transfer from the former ofﬁce or agency should be at least very satisfactory. 

4.2. Education and Training 

4.3. Experience and Outstanding Accomplishments 

4.4. Psycho-social Attributes and Personality Traits 

4.5. Potential 

5. General exam score for ﬁrst and second level positions is valid for one (1) year reckoned from the date of examination. 

6. An employee may be promoted or transferred to a position which is not more than three (3) salary grade cases, such as: if the vacant position is next-inwrank as identiﬁed in the System of Ranking Positions (SRP) approved by the head of agency, or the lone entrance position indicated in the agency stafﬁng pattern. 

7. An employee should have rendered at least very satisfactory service for the last rating period in the present position at the time of application for vacant position before being considered for promotion. 

8. An employee who” is on local or foreign scholarship or training grant or on maternity leave may be considered for promotion. 

For this purpose, performance rating to be considered shall be the rating immediately prior to the scholarship or training grant or maternity leave. 

If promoted, the effectivity date of the promotional appointment shall be on assumption to duty. 

9. The appointing authority may opt to re-open the vacant position when the evaluation results of the SPB does not conform to his/her standards. 

10. Promotion within six (6) months prior to compulsory retirement shall not be allowed except as otherwise provided by law. 

11. A notice announcing the appointment of an employee shall be posted in three conspicuous places in the agency a day after the issuance of the appointment for at least ﬁfteen (15) calendar days. 

12. The approved DOH MPP shall be used as one of the bases for the expeditious approval of appointments, for attestation and accreditation to take ﬁnal action on appointments. 

VII. FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 

1. In the performance of the SPB’s role of assisting the appointing authority in the exercise of his/her wide latitude of discretion, the SPB shall perform the following functions and responsibilities: 

1.1. Follow strictly the process on the selection of employees for appointment in the government service; 

1.2. Submit a comprehensive evaluation report of candidates screened for appointment so that the appointing authority will be guided in choosing the candidates who can efﬁciently discharge the duties and responsibilities of the position to be ﬁlled. The evaluation report should not only specify whether the candidates meet the qualiﬁcation standards of the position but also should include observations and comments on the candidate’s competence and other qualiﬁcations that are important in the performance of the duties and responsibilities of the position to be ﬁlled. Likewise, information about the candidate’s preference of assignment should be mentioned in the report; 

1.3. Comply with the policy on the three (3)-salary grade limitation on promotion. This policy is intended to minimize possible abuse of discretion in the appointment process and to exercise greater scrutiny in the screening of candidates. It should be pointed out that the 3-salary grade limitation shall apply only to promotion and. not to transfer, reemployment, reappointment and reclassiﬁcation/upgrading, including appointment from non—career service positions to career service positions and vice-versa; 

1.4. Check the approved agency System of Ranking Positions (SRP) in identifying the next-in-rank positions to be considered in ﬁlling a vacant position; 

1.5. Ensure that the minutes of all deliberations are recorded, properly ﬁled and maintained. which must be made accessible to interested parties upon written request, and for inspection and audit by the CSC, if necessary; 

1.6. Through the HRM Unit, make accessible the following information or documents upon written request: 

a. Screening procedure and criteria for selection, and its amendments; 

b. Policies relative to personnel actions, including the gender and development dimensions of the Merit Promotion Plan, and 

c. Approved DOH MPP. 

1.7. Notify all applicants on the result of the selection; and 

1.8. Provide information'about the individual rating of a particular applicant upon written request subject to the approval of the appointing authority. 

2. The'membership of the SPB can be modiﬁed, provided it conforms to the composition prescribed in CSC MC No. 3, s. 2001. Agencies may add a reasonable number of members, but the prescribed composition may not be reduced. SPB members must be duly designated and their names-posted in the agency bulletin board. 

Any change in the composition of the SPB should be reported to the CSC Regional Ofﬁce or Field Ofﬁce concerned. 

3. All complaints or grievances pertaining to selection and evaluation of applicants shall be submitted to the agency Grievance Committee. 

VIII. ISSUANCE OF APPOINTMENT 

1. The appointing authority shall assess the merits of the SPB’s evaluation for appointment and in the exercise of sound discretion, select, in so far as practicable, from among the applicants deemed qualiﬁed for appointment to the vacant position. 

2. The appointing authority may appoint an applicant who is not next—in-rank but possesses superior qualiﬁcation and competence and has undergone selection process. 

3. An employee may be promoted or transferred to a position which is not more than three (3) salary pay or job grades higher than the employee’s present position except in very meritorious cases, such as: if the vacant position is next-in-rank as identiﬁed in the SRP approved by the Head of Agency, or the lone or entrance position indicated in the agency stafﬁng pattem. 

4. A qualiﬁed next-in-rank may present the grievance on the issuance of an appointment under the following conditions: 

4.1. Non-compliance with the selection process; 

4.2. Discrimination on account of age, gender, civil status, disability, pregnancy, religion, ethnicity, or political afﬁliation; 

4.3. Other violations of the MPP. 

5. Employees who were issued original appointments under permanent status in the Career Service and-who meet all the requirements of the position including the Civil Service Eligibility shall. undergo 6 months probationary period. 

6.. A notation “under probation for 6 months” shall be indicated at the back of the appointment. 

7. Among Level 3 Teaching and Training Hospitals, the following doctors shall be issued temporary status of appointment: 

7.1. Medical Ofﬁcer (MO) 111 who are undergoing Residency Training Program (RTP).  

7.2. Resident/s or trainee/s in their last year of their RTP may be appointed as MO IV if available and meritorious. 

7.3. Doctors who have completed their RTP and are eligible to take the Specialty board exam, in preparation for taking and passing the specialty board exam, may be appointed as MO IV or MO III in the absence of an M0 IV position. The appointment is renewable every year for a maximum period of three (3) years. In exceptional cases, extension beyond the maximum period may be allowed with justiﬁcation subject to conﬁrmation by the CSC. 

7.4. Doctors undergoing Fellowship Training Program may be appointed as MO IV, or MO 111 in the absence of an M0 IV position. 

7.5. Doctors who have completed their RTP and who are already Diplomate/ Fellow and have been appointed as MO IV prior to this issuance due to the absence of an available Medical Specialist (MS) position. The appointment is renewable every year for a maximum period of three (3) ,years or until a MS position has been made available. In exceptional cases, extension beyond the maximum period may be allowed with justiﬁcation subject to conﬁrmation by the CSC. 

IX. REPEALING CLAUSE 

This Order repeals Administrative Order No. 87-3 5. 2002 and all other existing issuances which are inconsistent herewith. 

X. EFFECTIVITY 

This Administrative Order shall take effect immediately after the approval of the Civil Service Commission. - 
</body>
   

<sign>JANETTE P. LORETO-GARIN, MD, MBA-H</sign>
<signtitle>Secretary of Health</signtitle>